Bird
====

Bird

â€œAvesâ€? redirects here. For other uses, see Aves (disambiguation).

Jurassic



Superb Fairy-wren, Malurus cyaneus, juvenile



Kingdom: Animalia

Phylum: Chordata

Subphylum: Vertebrata

Class: Aves
Linnaeus, 1758


Orders


About two dozen - see section below


Birds (class Aves) are bipedal, warm-blooded, oviparous vertebrate animals. The earliest known
bird is the Jurassic Archaeopteryx, and most scientists think that birds evolved from theropod
dinosaurs. Ranging in size from tiny hummingbirds to the huge Ostrich and Emu, there are between
9,000-10,000 known living bird species in the world, making them the most diverse class of
terrestrial vertebrate. About 120â€“130 species have become extinct as a result of human activity
since 1600, and hundreds more prior to this.

Birds are characterized by feathers, a beak with no teeth, the laying of hard-shelled eggs, high
metabolic rate, a four-chambered heart, and a light but strong skeleton. Most birds have forelimbs
modified as wings and can fly, though the ratites are flightless, and several others, particularly
endemic island species, have also lost the ability to fly.

Many species of bird undertake long distance annual migrations, and many more perform shorter more
irregular movements. Birds are social and communicate using visual signals and through calls and
bird song, and participate in social behaviours including cooperative hunting and breeding,
flocking. The breeding behaviour of birds is dominated by monogamy, although infidelity is common
in some species and other species have polygamous or polyandrous breeding systems. Eggs are
usually laid in a nest and incubated and most birds have an extended period of parental care after
hatching.

Humans make use of birds in a number of ways: many are important sources of food, acquired either
through hunting or farming, often commercially. Some species, particularly songbirds and parrots,
are popular as pets. Birds figure prominently in all aspects of human culture from religion to
poetry and popular music. Numerous species of birds are threatened with extinction by human
activities and efforts are underway to protect them.

Contents
========



* Evolution and taxonomy
  o Use of the term "bird"
  o Dinosaurs and the origin of birds
  o Radiation of modern birds
  o Bird orders

* Distribution
* Bird anatomy
  o Feathers and plumage
  o Flight

* Behaviour
  o Diet and Feeding
  o Migration
  o Communication
  o Breeding
    - Courtship
    - Social systems
    - Territories, nesting and incubation
    - Parental care and fledging
    - Brood parasites


* Relationship with humans
  o Birds and humans
  o Birds in popular culture
  o Conservation

* References
* External links

 Evolution and taxonomy
=============================



        Main article: Bird evolution

Archaeopteryx, the earliest known bird. Some place it basalmost in the Aves, others immediately
outside that "true bird" clade



The first classification of birds was developed by Francis Willughby and John Ray in their 1676
volume, Ornithologiae.[1] That work, slightly modified, was the basis for today's classification
system originally devised by Carolus Linnaeus in 1758.

Birds are categorized as a biological class Aves in Linnean taxonomy. Modern phylogenies place
Aves in the dinosaur clade Theropoda; a few scientists consider them synonymous or even place the
Theropoda in Aves, but this view is not widely accepted. According to the current consensus, Aves
and a sister group, the order Crocodilia, together are the sole living members of an unranked
"reptile" clade, the Archosauria. Archaeopteryx, from the Kimmeridgian (Late Jurassic, some
155-150 million years ago), is considered to be the earliest known bird. Phylogenetically, Aves is
defined as all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of modern birds (a specific modern
bird species like Passer domesticus for the purposes of phylogenetic taxonomy), and Archaeopteryx
lithographica] or some more modern bird] to avoid the uncertainties] about Archaeopteryx's
placement within the theropods.

Modern birds are divided into two superorders, the Paleognathae (mostly flightless birds like
ostriches), and the wildly diverse Neognathae, containing all other birds. Depending on the
taxonomic viewpoint, the number of species cited varies anywhere from 8,800 to 10,200 known living
bird species in the world.

 Use of the term "bird"
=============================


This article uses "bird" to denote members of the Aves including Archaeopteryx, but primarily
deals with the living birds which are all Neornithes and thus unquestionably Aves. In popular
science, the term "bird" is often used more as a form taxon, denoting any theropod with feathers
and wings. Thus, one may find animals such as Microraptor and Rahonavis to be called "birds" in a
news article, although most scientists would not consider them to belong to Aves.

 Dinosaurs and the origin of birds
========================================



        Main article: Dinosaur-bird connection

Confuciusornis, a Cretaceous bird from China



There is significant evidence that birds evolved from theropod dinosaurs, specifically, that birds
are members of Maniraptora, a group of theropods which includes dromaeosaurs and oviraptorids,
among others.[2] As more non-avian theropods that are closely related to birds are discovered, the
formerly clear distinction between non-birds and birds becomes less so. Recent discoveries in
northeast China (Liaoning Province), demonstrating that many small theropod dinosaurs had
feathers, contribute to this ambiguity.[3]

The basal bird Archaeopteryx from the Jurassic is well-known as one of the first "missing links"
to be found in support of evolution in the late 19th century, though it is not considered a direct
ancestor of modern birds. Confuciusornis is another early bird; it lived in the Early Cretaceous.
Both may be predated by Protoavis texensis, though the fragmentary nature of this fossil leaves it
open to considerable doubt if this was a bird ancestor. Other Mesozoic birds include the
Enantiornithes, Yanornis, Ichthyornis, Gansus and the Hesperornithiformes, a group of flightless
divers resembling grebes and loons.

The recently (2002) discovered dromaeosaur Cryptovolans was capable of powered flight, possessed a
sternal keel and had ribs with uncinate processes. In fact, Cryptovolans makes a better "bird"
than Archaeopteryx which is missing some of these modern bird features. Because of this, some
paleontologists have suggested that dromaeosaurs are actually basal birds whose larger members are
secondarily flightless, i.e. that dromaeosaurs evolved from birds and not the other way around.
Evidence for this theory is currently inconclusive, but digs continue to unearth fossils
(especially in China) of the strange feathered dromaeosaurs. At any rate, it is fairly certain
that avian flight existed in the mid-Jurassic and was "tried out" in several lineages and variants
by the mid-Cretaceous.

Although ornithischian (bird-hipped) dinosaurs share the same hip structure as birds, birds
actually originated from the saurischian (lizard-hipped) dinosaurs (if the dinosaurian origin
theory is correct), and thus arrived at their hip structure condition independently. In fact, the
bird-like hip structure also developed a third time among a peculiar group of theropods, the
Therizinosauridae.

An alternate theory to the dinosaurian origin of birds, espoused by a few scientists (most notably
Lary Martin and Alan Feduccia), states that birds (including maniraptoran "dinosaurs") evolved
from early archosaurs like Longisquama,[4] a theory which is contested by most other scientists in
paleontology, and by experts in feather development and evolution.[5]

 Radiation of modern birds
================================


Modern birds are classified in Neornithes, which are now known to have evolved into some basic
lineages by the end of the Cretaceous (see Vegavis). The Neornithes are split into the
Paleognathae and Neognathae. The paleognaths include the tinamous (found only in Central and South
America) and the ratites. The ratites are large flightless birds, and include ostriches,
cassowaries, kiwis and emus (though some scientists suspect that the ratites represent an
artificial grouping of birds which have independently lost the ability to fly in a number of
unrelated lineages). The basal divergence from the remaining Neognathes was that of the
Galloanseri, the superorder containing the Anseriformes (ducks, geese and swans), and the
Galliformes (the pheasants, grouse, and their allies). The dates for the splits are a matter of
considerable debate amongst scientists. It is agreed that the Neothrines evolved in the Cretaceous
and that the split between the Galloanseri and the other Neognathes occurred before the K-T
extinction event, but there are different opinions about whether the radiation of the remaining
Neognathes occurred before or after the extinction of the other dinosaurs.[6] This disagreement is
in part caused by a divergence in the evidence, with molecular dating suggesting a Cretaceous
radiation and fossil evidence supporting a Tertiary radiation. Attempts made to reconcile the
molecular and fossil evidence have proved controversial.[6][7]

The classification of birds is a contentious issue. Sibley & Ahlquist's Phylogeny and
Classification of Birds (1990) is a landmark work on the classification of birds (although
frequently debated and constantly revised). A preponderance of evidence seems to suggest that the
modern bird orders constitute accurate taxa. However, scientists are not in agreement as to the
relationships between the orders; evidence from modern bird anatomy, fossils and DNA have all been
brought to bear on the problem but no strong consensus has emerged. More recently, new fossil and
molecular evidence is providing an increasingly clear picture of the evolution of modern bird
orders. See also: Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy and dinosaur classification.

 Bird orders
==================

Relationships between bird orders according the Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy. "Galloanseri" is now
considered a superorder Galloanserae



This is a list of the taxonomic orders in the subclass Neornithes, or modern birds. The list of
birds gives a more detailed summary of these, including families.

SUBCLASS NEORNITHES
Paleognathae:

* Struthioniformes, Ostrich, emus, kiwis, and allies
* Tinamiformes, tinamous

Neognathae:

* Anseriformes, waterfowl
* Galliformes, fowl
* Gaviiformes, loons
* Podicipediformes, grebes
* Procellariiformes, albatrosses, petrels, and allies
* Sphenisciformes, penguins
* Pelecaniformes, pelicans and allies
* Ciconiiformes, storks and allies
* Phoenicopteriformes, flamingos
* Falconiformes, falcons, eagles, hawks and allies
* Gruiformes, cranes and allies
* Charadriiformes, gulls, button-quail, plovers and allies
* Pteroclidiformes, sandgrouse
* Columbiformes, doves and pigeons
* Psittaciformes, parrots and allies
* Cuculiformes, cuckoos, turacos, hoatzin
* Strigiformes, owls
* Caprimulgiformes, nightjars and allies
* Apodiformes, swifts and hummingbirds
* Coraciiformes, kingfishers
* Piciformes, woodpeckers and allies
* Trogoniformes, trogons
* Coliiformes, mousebirds
* Passeriformes, passerines

Note: This is the traditional classification (the so-called Clements order). A radically different
classification based on molecular data has been developed (the so-called Sibley-Monroe
classification or Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy). This has influenced taxonomic thinking considerably,
with the Galloanserae proving well-supported by recent molecular, fossil and anatomical
evidence.[6] With increasingly good evidence, it had become possible by 2006 to test the major
proposals of the Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy, with favorable results (see for example
Charadriiformes, Gruiformes or Caprimulgiformes).

A wide variety of extinct bird taxa occurred during the Mesozoic era and left no modern
descendants. These include Confuciusornis, toothed seabirds like the Hesperornithes and
Ichthyornithes, and the diverse subclass Enantiornithes ("opposite birds"). For a comprehensive
listing of these ancient avians, see Fossil birds.

 Distribution
===================

A female House Sparrow living in an urban environment



Birds breed on all seven continents, with the highest diversity occurring in tropical regions, as
a result of either higher speciation in the tropics or higher extinction rates at higher
latitudes.[8] They are able to live and feed in most of the world's terrestrial habitats; the most
extreme the south of their range is the breeding colonies of the Snow Petrel, as far as 440 km
inland in Antarctica.[9] Several familes have adapted to life on all the worlds oceans,[10] coming
ashore only to breed, as well in them, with penguins recorded as diving as deep as 300 m.[11] Many
bird species have been introduced to new locations by humans and have established naturalized
breeding colonies there. This has either been done deliberately, for example the Ring-necked
Pheasant is one of the most widely introduced birds in the world due to introductions for sporting
reasons;[12] or accidentally, for example escaped pets such as Monk Parakeets establishing in a
number of North American cities.[13] Others, such as the Cattle Egret and Galah have spread widely
beyond their original range due to the creation of suitable habitat by agriculture.[14]

 Bird anatomy
===================



        Main article: Bird anatomy

External anatomy of a typical bird



Birds have a body plan that shows many unusual adaptations, mostly to facilitate flight.

The skeleton consists of bones which are very light. They have large pneumatic cavities which
connect with the respiratory system. The skull bones are fused and do not show cranial sutures.
The orbits are large and separated by a bony septum. The spine has cervical, thoracic, lumbar and
caudal regions with the number of cervical (neck) vertebrae highly variable and especially
flexible, but movement is reduced in the anterior thoracic vertebrae and absent in the later
vertebrae. The last few are fused with the pelvis to form the synsacrum. The ribs are flattened
and the sternum is keeled for the attachment of flight muscles, except in the flightless bird
orders. The forelimbs are modified into the wings.

Unlike mammals, birds do not urinate. Their kidneys extract nitrogenous wastes from the
bloodstream, but instead of excreting it as urea dissolved in urine, they excrete it in the form
of uric acid. They also excrete creatine rather than creatinine as in mammals. Uric acid has a
very low solubility in water, so it emerges as a white paste. This material, as well as the output
of the intestines, emerges from the bird's cloaca. The cloaca is a multi-purpose opening: their
wastes are expelled through it, they mate by joining cloaca, and females lay eggs out of it. In
addition, many species of birds regurgitate pellets.

Birds have one of the most complex respiratory systems of all animal groups. When the bird
inhales, 75% of the fresh air bypasses the lungs and flows directly into a posterior air sac which
extends from the lungs and connects with air spaces in the bones and fills them with air. When the
bird exhales, the used air flows out of the lung and the stored fresh air from the posterior air
sac is simultaneously forced into the lungs. Thus, a bird's lungs receive a constant supply of
fresh air during both inhalation and exhalation.[15] Sound production is achieved using the
syrinx, a muscular chamber with several tympanic membranes, situated at the lower end of the
trachea where it bifurcates. The bird's heart has four chambers and the right aortic arch gives
rise to systemic aorta (unlike in the mammals where the left arch is involved). Postcava receives
blood from the limbs via the renal portal system. Birds, unlike mammals, have nucleated
erythrocytes, i.e. red blood cells which retain a nucleus.

The digestive system of the bird is unique, involveing a crop for storage and a gizzard that
contains swallowed stones for grinding food given the bird's lack of teeth. Most are highly
adapted for rapid digestion, an adaptation to flight. Migratory birds have the additional ability
to reduce parts of the intestines prior to migration.[16]

The nervous system, relative to the bird's size, is actually quite large. The most developed part
of the brain is the one that controls the flight related function while the cerebellum coordinates
movement and the cerebrum controls behavior patterns, navigation, mating and nest building. A
birdâ€™s eyes are developed for taking off, spotting landmarks, hunting and feeding. Birds with
eyes on the sides of their heads have a wide visual field while birds with eyes on the front of
their heads like owls have binocular vision and can measure depth.[17] Most birds have a poor
sense of smell with notable exceptions including kiwis,[18] vultures and the tubenoses.[19] The
visual system is usually highly developed. Water birds have special flexible lenses, allowing
accommodation for vision in air and water. Some species also have dual fovea. The bird retina has
a fan shaped blood supply system called the pecten. The avian ear lacks external pinnae but is
covered by feathers. The inner ear has a cochlea but it is not spiral as in mammals.

Some birds use chemical defenses against predators. Some Procellariiformes can eject an unpleasant
oil against an aggressor,[20] and some species of pitohui, found in New Guinea, secrete a powerful
neurotoxin in their skin and feathers.[21]

 Feathers and plumage
===========================



        Main article: Feather

The plumage of the African Scops Owl allows it to blend in with its surroundings



The one characteristic that distinguishes birds from all other living groups is the covering of
feathers. Feathers are epidermal growths attached to the skin that serve a variety of functions to
birds: they aid in thermoregulation by insulating birds from cold weather and water, they are
essential to bird flight, and they are also used in display, camouflage and signalling. There are
several different types of feather that serve different purposes. Feathers need maintenance, and
birds preen or groom their feathers daily, using their bills to brush away foreign particles, and
applying waxy secretions from the uropygial gland, which protects feather flexibility and also
acts as an anti-microbial agent, inhibiting the growth of feather-degrading bacteria.[22] This may
be supplemented with the secretions of formic acid from ants, which birds apply in a behaviour
known as anting in order to remove feather parasites.[23]

The arrangement and appearance of feathers on the body is known as plumage. Plumage is regularly
moulted, the standard plumage of a bird that has moulted after breeding is known as the 'basic
plumage', breeding plumages or variations of the basic plumage are known as 'alternate
plumages'.[24]

 Flight
=============



        Main article: Bird flight

Flight characterizes most birds, and distinguishes them from almost all other vertebrates with the
exception of mammalian bats and the extinct pterosaurs. As the main means of locomotion for most
bird species, flight is used for breeding, feeding, and predator avoidance and escape. Birds have
a variety of adaptations to flight, including a lightweight skeleton, two large flight muscles,
the pectoralis (which accounts for 15% of the total mass of the bird) and the supercoracoideus and
a modified forelimb (the wing) serving as an aerofoil. [25] Wing shape and size primarily
determines the type of flight each species is capable of. Many birds combined powered or flapping
flight with less energy intensive soaring flight. About 40 species of extant birds are flightless,
many extinct birds were also flightless. Flightlessness often arises in birds on isolated islands,
probably due to the lack of land predators and limited resources, which rewards the loss of costly
unnecessary adaptations.[26] Penguins, while flightless, use similar musculature and movements to
"fly" through the water, as do auks, shearwaters and dippers.[27]

 Behaviour
================


Most birds are diurnal, but some birds, such as many species of owls and nightjars, are nocturnal
or crepuscular (active during twilight hours), and many coastal waders feed when the tides are
appropriate, by day or night.

 Diet and Feeding
=======================

The South Polar Skua (left) is a generalist, taking the eggs of other birds, fish, carrion and
other animals. This skua is attempting to push an Adelie Penguin (right) off its nest



Birds feed on a variety of materials, including nectar, fruit[28] , plants [29], seeds [30],
carrion[31], and various types of small animals including other birds [32]. Because birds have no
teeth, the digestive system of birds is specially adapted to process deal with unmasticated food
items that are usually swallowed whole.[25]

Various feeding strategies are used by birds. Gleaning for insects, invertebrates, fruit and seeds
is used by many species. Sallying from a branch and flycatching for insects is used by many
songbirds. Nectar feeders such as hummingbirds [33], lorikeets, sunbirds [34], honeyeaters and
some other songbirds is facilitated by specially adapted brushy tongues and in many cases bills
designed to fit co-adapted flowers.[35] Probing for invertebrates is used by kiwis and shorebirds
with long bills; in the case of shorebirds length of bill and feeding method allow niche
separation.[25] [36] Pursuit diving is used by falcons and accipiters in the air, and by loons,
diving ducks and penguins in the water. Plunge diving is used by sulids, kingfishers and terns.
Three species of prion, the flamingos and some ducks are filter feeders.[37] [38] Geese and
dabbling ducks are primarily grazers. Some species will engage in kleptoparasitism, stealing food
items from other birds; frigatebirds, gulls [39], and skuas [40] employ this type of feeding
behaviour. Kleptoparasitism is not thought to play a significant part of the diet of any species,
and is instead a supplement to food obtained by hunting; a study of Great Frigatebirds stealing
from Masked Boobies estimated that the frigatebirds could at most obtain 40% of the food they
needed, and on average obtained only 5%.[41] Finally, some birds are scavengers such as gulls and
vultures. Some birds may employ many strategies to obtain food or feed on a variety of food items
and are called generalists [42], while others are considered specialists [43],concentrating time
and effort on specific food items or having a single strategy to obtain food.

 Migration
================



        Main article: Bird migration

The routes of satellite tagged Bar-tailed Godwits migrating north from New Zealand. This species
has the longest known non-stop migration of any species, up to 10,200 km



Many bird species migrate to take advantage of global differences of seasonal temperatures to
optimize availability of food sources and breeding habitat. These migrations vary among the
different groups. Many landbirds, shorebirds and waterbirds undertake annual long distance bird
migrations, usually triggered by length of daylight as well as weather conditions. It is
characterized by species spending the warmer breeding season in temperate or arctic/antarctic
regions, and the colder non breeding season in the tropical regions. Prior to migration birds
substantially increase body fats and reserves and reduce the size of some of their organs.[44][16]
Migration is highly energetically demanding, particularly as birds need to cross deserts and
oceans without refuelling; landbirds have a flight range of around 2500 km and shorebirds can fly
up to 4000 km,[25] although the Bar-tailed Godwit is capable of non-stop flights of up to 10,200
km.[45] Seabirds also undertake long migrations, the longest annual migration being those of Sooty
Shearwaters, which nest in New Zealand and Chile and spend the northern summer feeding in the
North Pacific off Japan, Alaska and California, an annual round trip of 64,000?km.[46] Other
seabirds disperse after breeding, travelling widely but having no set migration route. Albatrosses
nesting in the Southern Ocean often undertake circumpolar trips between breeding seasons.[47]

Birds also display other types of migration. Some species undertake shorter migrations, travelling
only as far as is required to avoid bad weather or obtain food. These include irruptive species,
which may be quite common some years and almost absent in others. This type of migration is
normally associated with food availability.[48] Boreal finches, arctic owls, and waxwings are most
commonly identified as irruptive species. Altitudinal migration is a form of short distance
migration. Species may also travel shorter distances over part of their range, with individuals
from higher latitudes traveling into the existing range of conspecifics, or undertake partial
migrations, where only a fraction of the population, usually females and subdominant males,
migrates.[49] Partial migration can form a large percentage of the migration bejhaviour of birds
in some regions; in Australia found that 44% of non-passerine birds studied were partially
migratory and 32% of passerines were.[50] Altitudinal migrants move from higher elevations to
lower ones during suboptimal conditions. It is most often triggered by temperature changes and
usually occurs when the normal territories become inhospitable also due to lack of food.[51] Some
species may also be nomadic, holding no fixed territory and moving according to weather and food
availability. Parrots as a family are overwhelmingly neither migratory nor sedentary but
considered to either be dispersive, irruptive, nomadic or undertake small and irregular
migration.[52]

The ability of birds to return to precise locations across vast distances has been known for some
time; in an experiment conducted in the 1950s a Manx Shearwater released in Boston returned to its
colony in Skomer, Wales within 13 days, a distance of 5,150 kilometres (3,200?mi).[53] Birds
navigate during migration using a variety of methods. For diurnal migrants the sun is used to
navigate by, at night a stellar compass is used instead. Birds that use the sun compensate for the
changing position of the sun during the day, by the use of an internal clock.[25] Orientation with
the stellar compass depends on the position of the constellations surrounding Polaris.[54] These
are backed up in some species with the ability to sense the Earth's geomagnetism through
specialised sensitive photoreceptors.[55]

 Communication
====================


Birds communicate principally using visual and auditory signals. Signals can be interspecific
(between species) and intraspecific (within species).

The display of the Sunbittern mimics a large potentially dangerous predator



Visual communication in birds serves a number of functions and is manifested in both the bird's
plumage and behaviour. Plumage can be used to assess and assert social dominance,[56] display
breeding condition in sexually selected species, even create a threatening display, such as the
threat display of the Sunbittern, which mimics a potentially large predator. This display has is
used to ward of potential predators such as hawks, and protect young chicks.[57] Variation in
plumage also allows for identification, particularly between species.

Visual communication also includes displays. These usually consist or ritualised behaviour, and
are used to signal aggression and submission or are used in the formation of pair bonds. These
ritualised behaviours develop from non-signalling actions such as preening, adjustments of feather
position, pecking or other behaviours. The most elaborate displays are displayed during courtship,
particularly the breeding dances of the albatrosses, where the successful formation of a life long
pair bond requires both partners to develop and learn an unique dance,[58] and the
birds-of-paradise, where the breeding success of males depends on plumage and display quality.[59]
Male birds can also demonstrate their fitness through construction; female weavers like the Baya
Weavers chose mates dependent on the nest-building skills of males,[60] and numerous species of
bowerbird attract mates using bowers decorated with bright objects.[61]

In addition to visual communication, birds are renowned for their auditory communication. Calls,
and in some species song, are the major means by which bird communicate with sound; however some
birds also create mechanical sounds, for example driving air thorugh their feathers, as do the
Coenocorypha snipes of New Zealand,[62], the territorial drumming of woodpeckers or use of tools
to drum in Palm Cockatoos.[63] Bird calls and songs can e very complex; sounds are created in the
syrinx, and in some species both sides can be operated seperately, resulting in two different
songs being produced at the same time. Calls are used for a number of purposes, and several
purposes can be tied into an individual song. They are used to advertise when looking for a mate,
the either to attract a mate, aid identification of potential mates or aid in bond formation
(often with combined with visual communication), they can also be used to claim a territory. Calls
can also be used to identify individual identity, aiding parents in finding chicks in crowded
colonies or adults reuniting with mates at the start of the breeding season. They can also be used
to warn other birds of potential predators; calls of this nature can be highly detailed and convey
highly specific information about the nature of the threat.[64]


* House Wren call (file info) â€” play in browser (beta)
  o The call of the House Wren, a common songbird from North America
  o Problems listening to the file? See media help.

 Breeding
===============

These Redwing hatchlings are completely dependent on parental care

 Courtship
================


Breeding usually involve some type of courtship display, most often performed by the male.[65]
Most are rather simple, and usually involve some type of song. Some displays can be quite
elaborate, using such varied methods as tail and wing drumming, dancing, aerial flights, and
communal leks depending on the species. Females are most often involved with partner
selection.[66] Courtship feeding, billing and preening are commonly performed between partners,
most often after birds have been paired and mated.[67]

 Social systems
=====================


The three mating systems that predominate among birds are monogamy (seen in approximately 91% of
bird species), polygyny (2%) and polyandry (< 1%). Monogamous species of males and females pair
for the breeding season. In some cases, the individuals may pair for life.

One reason for the high rate of monogamy among birds is the fact that male birds are just as adept
at parental care as females. In most groups of animals, male parental care is rare, but in birds
it is quite common; in fact, it is more extensive in birds than in any other vertebrate class. In
birds, male care can be seen as important or essential to female fitness. "In one form of monogamy
such as with obligate monogamy a female cannot rear a litter without the aid of a male".[68]

The parental behavior most closely associated with monogamy is male incubation. Interestingly,
male incubation is the most confining male parental behavior. It takes time and also may require
physiological changes that interfere with continued mating. This extreme loss of mating
opportunities leads to a reduction in reproductive success among incubating males. Gowaty (1983)
notes that "This information then suggests that sexual selection may be less intense in taxa where
males incubate, hypothetically because males allocate more effort to parental care and less to
mating".[69] In other words, in bird species in which male incubation is common, females tend to
select mates on the basis of parental behaviors rather than physical appearance.

 Territories, nesting and incubation
==========================================


Many birds actively defend a territory from others of the same species during the breeding season.
Large territories are protected in order to protect the food source for their chicks. Species that
are unable to defend feeding territories, such as seabirds and swifts, often breed colonially
instead, which is thought to offer protection from predators. Colonial breeders will defend small
nesting sites, and competition between and within species for nesting sites can be intense.[70]

The nesting colonies of the Social Weaver are amongst the largest bird-created structures



All birds lay amniotic eggs[71] with hard shells made mostly of calcium carbonate. The colour of
eggs is controlled by a number of factors, those of hole and burrow nesting species tend to be
white or pale, while those of open nesters such as Charadriiformes are camouflaged. Many bird
species do not conform to this, however; the ground nesting nightjars have pale eggs, camouflage
being provided instead by the bird's plumage. Species that are victims of brood parasites like the
Dideric Cuckoo will vary their egg colours in order to improve the chances of spotting a cuckoo's
egg, and female cuckoos need to match their eggs to their hosts.[72]

The eggs are usually laid in a nest, which can be highly elaborate, like those created by weavers
and oropendolas, or extremely primitive, like some albatrosses, which are no more than a scrape on
the ground. Some species have no nest, the cliff nesting Common Guillemot lays its egg on bare
rock and the egg of the Emperor Penguin is kept between the body and feet; this is especially
prevalent in ground nesting species where the newly hatched young are precocial. Most species
build more elaborate nests, which can be cups, domes, plates, beds scrapes, mounds or burrows.[73]
Most nests are built in shelter and hidden to reduce the risk of predation, more open nests are
usually colonial or built by larger birds capable of defending the nest. Nests are mostly built
out of plant matter, some species specifically select plants such as yarrow which have chemicals
that reduce nesting parasites such as mites, leading to increased chick survival.[74] Nests are
often lined with feathers in improve the retention of heat.

Incubation, which regulates of temperature to keep it optimum for chick development, usually
begins after the last egg has been laid. Incubation duties are often shared in monogamous species,
in polygamous species a singe parent undertakes all duties. Warmth from parents passes to the eggs
through brood patches, areas of bare skin on the abdomen or breast of the incubating birds.
Incubation can be an energetically demanding process, for example adult albatrosses lose as much
as 83 g of body weight a day.[75] Incubation periods last between 10 days (in species of
woodpeckers, cuckoos and passerine birds) to over 80 days (in albatrosses and kiwis).

 Parental care and fledging
=================================

The altricial chicks of the Richard's Pipit have bright mouths to stimulate feeding



Chicks can be helpless or independent at birth, or be at any stage in between. The helpless chicks
are known as altricial, and tend to be born, small, naked and blind; chicks that are mobile and
feathered at birth are precocial, chicks can also be semi-prcocial and semi-altricial. Altricial
chicks require help in thermoregulation and need to be brooded for longer than prococial chicks.

The length and nature of parental care varies widely amongst different orders and species. At one
extreme parental care in megapodes ends at hatching, with the chick being able to care for itself
immediately.[76] At the other extreme many seabirds have extended periods of parental care, the
longest being Great Frigatebird, the chicks of which taking up to six months to fledge and being
fed by the parents for up to 14 months after that.[77]

In some species the care of young is shared between both parents, in other species it is the
responsibility of just one sex. In some species other members of the same species will help the
breeding pair in raising the young. These helpers are usually close relatives such as the chicks
of the breeding pair from previous breeding seasons.[78] Alloparenting is particularly common in
the corvids, but has been observed in as different species as the Rifleman, Red Kite and
Australian Magpie.

This Reed Warbler is rasing the young of a Common Cuckoo, a brood parasite



The point at which chicks fledge varies dramatically. The chicks of the Synthliboramphus
murrelets, like the Ancient Murrelet, leave the nest the night after they hatch, following their
parents calls out to sea, where they are raised away from terrestrial predators.[79] Some other
species, especially ducks, move their chicks away from the nest at an early age. In most species
chicks leave the nest soon after, or just before, they are able to fly. Parental care after
fledging varies; in albatrosses chicks leave the nest alone and recieve no further help, other
species continue some supplementary feeding after fledging. Chicks may also follow their parents
during their first migration.

 Brood parasites
======================



        Main article: Brood parasite

Although some insects and fish engage in brood parasitism, most brood parasites are birds. Brood
parasites are birds which lay their eggs in the nests of other birds. These eggs are often
accepted and raised by the host species, often at the cost of their own brood. There are two kinds
of brood parasite, obligate brood parasites, which are incapable of raising their own young and
must lay their eggs in the nests of other species; and non-obligate brood parasites, which are
capable of raising their own young but lay eggs in nests of conspecifics in order to increase its
reproductive output. The most famous obligate brood parasites are the cuckoos, although in total
100 species of cuckoo, honeyguide, icterid, estrildid finch and duck are obligate parasites.[80]
Some brood parasites are adapted to hatching before their hosts and pushing their hosts eggs out
of the nest, ensuring that all the food brought to the nest is fed to them.

 Relationship with humans
===============================

Chickens in a coop



Birds are highly visible and common animals and humans have had a long relationship with them. In
some cases the relationship has been mutualistic, such as the cooperative relationship between
honeyguides and tribesmen in obtaining honey,[81] or commensal, as found in the numerous species
that benefit indirectly from human activities. For example, the common pigeon or Rock Pigeon
thrives in urban areas around the world. Human effects can also be detrimental, where species are
threatened by human activities.

Birds also have many effects on humans. They can act as vectors for diseases spreading
psittacosis, salmonellosis, campylobacteriosis, mycobacteriosis (avian tuberculosis), avian
influenza (bird flu), giardiasis, and cryptosporidiosis. They can also be commercially important
pests. The are also important food and income sources.

 Birds and humans
=======================


Birds are an important food source for humans. The most commonly eaten species is the domestic
chicken and its eggs, although geese, pheasants, turkeys, ducks and quail are also widely eaten.
Fowl grown for human consumption are referred to as poultry. Hunting has also been an important
method of obtaining birds for food, and in the past led to several bird extinctions.

Besides meat and eggs, birds provide other items useful to humans, including feathers for bedding
and decoration, guano-derived phosphorus and nitrogen used in fertilizer and gunpowder, and the
central ingredient of bird's nest soup.

Cormorants used by fishermen in Southeast Asia



Other birds have long been used by humans to perform tasks. Falcons are still used for hunting,
while cormorants are employed by fishermen. Chickens and pigeons are popular as experimental
subjects, and are often used in biology and comparative psychology research. Birds are among the
most extensively studied of all animal groups. The scientific study of birds is called
ornithology. Hundreds of academic journals and thousands of scientists are devoted to bird
research, while amateur enthusiasts (called birdwatchers, twitchers or, more commonly, birders)
number in the millions.

Domesticated colour variety of Budgerigars



Colorful, particularly tropical, birds (e.g. parrots, and mynas) are often kept as pets although
this practice has led to the illegal trafficking of some endangered species; CITES, an
international agreement adopted in 1963, has considerably reduced trafficking in the bird species
it protects.

Many homeowners erect bird feeders near their homes to attract various species to their yards.
Bird feeding has grown into a multimillion dollar industry; for example an estimated 75% of
households in Britain provide food for birds at some point during the winter.[82]

 Birds in popular culture
===============================


Birds feature prominently in folklore and popular culture. They generally tend to be portrayed as
benign with hidden talents. Examples include Big Bird, Woodstock, Woody Woodpecker, and Donald and
Daffy Duck. Sometimes, birds are associated with a darker side, as exemplified by Edgar Allan
Poe's poem The Raven, the comic book series The Crow, or the appearance of various nocturnal owl
species during frightening moments in television and movies. Most often eagles and hawks appear as
regal characters, with the former often used as a national symbol for various countries. The
cuckoo clock remains a popular timepiece. The clocks hourly signal is made to imitate the call of
Europes Common Cuckoo. Various musical groups have been named after birds such as the Eagles, the
Fabulous Thunderbirds and Flock of Seagulls. Feature length movies with birds as the predominant
theme include Alfred Hitchcock's The Birds, The Birdman of Alcatraz, Winged Migration, March of
the Penguins, and Happy Feet. Professional and school athletic teams have used birds as mascots.
Birds have been referenced throughout literature, music and mythology. Many automobiles have been
named after birds.

 Conservation
===================



        Main article: Bird conservation

This Black-browed Albatross has been hooked on a long-line



Humans have had a large impact on many bird species. Human activities have in some cases allowed
some species to dramatically expand their natural ranges, in other species ranges have decreased
and have even resulted in many extinction. Over a hundred species have gone extinct in historical
times, although the most dramatic extinctions occurred in the Pacific Ocean as humans colonised
the islands of Melanesia, Polynesia and Micronesia, during which an estimated 750-1800 species of
bird went extinct.[83] According to Worldwatch Institute, many bird populations are currently
declining worldwide, with 1,200 species facing extinction in the next century.[84] The biggest
cited reason surrounds habitat loss.[85] Other threats include overhunting, accidental mortality
due to structural collisions and as long-line fishing bycatch, pollution, competition and
predation by nonnative invasive species,[86] oil spills and pesticide use and climate change.
Governments, along with numerous conservation charities, work to protect birds, either through
laws to protect birds, preserving and restoring bird habitat or establishing captive populations
for reintroductions.

See Late Quaternary prehistoric birds for taxa which disappeared in prehistoric and early historic
times, usually due to human activity (i.e., starting with the Upper Paleolithic Revolution). For
birds having gone extinct in modern times (since 1500), see Extinct birds.

