Human
=====

This article is about modern humans. For other human species, see Homo (genus), for other uses,
see Human

Pleistocene



Image of a man and a woman on the Pioneer plaque.

Least concern



Kingdom: Animalia

Phylum: Chordata

Class: Mammalia

Order: Primates

Family: Hominidae

Genus: Homo

Species: H. sapiens

Subspecies: H. s. sapiens



Trinomial name

Homo sapiens sapiens
Linnaeus, 1758

Humans, or human beings, are bipedal primates belonging to the mammalian species Homo sapiens
(Latin: "wise man" or "knowing man") in the family Hominidae (the great apes).[1][2] Humans have a
highly developed brain capable of abstract reasoning, language, and introspection. This mental
capability, combined with an erect body carriage that frees their upper limbs for manipulating
objects, has allowed humans to make far greater use of tools than any other species. Humans
originated in Africa about 200,000?years ago, but now they inhabit every continent, with a total
population of over 6.5 billion as of 2007.

Like most primates, humans are social by nature; however, humans are particularly adept at
utilizing systems of communication for self-expression, the exchange of ideas, and organization.
Humans create complex social structures composed of cooperating and competing groups, ranging in
scale from small families and partnerships to species-wide political, scientific and economic
unions. Social interactions between humans have also established an extremely wide variety of
traditions, rituals, ethics, values, social norms, and laws which form the basis of human society.
Humans also have a marked appreciation for beauty and aesthetics which, combined with the human
desire for self-expression, has led to cultural innovations such as art, literature and music.

Humans are also noted for their desire to understand and influence the world around them, seeking
to explain and manipulate natural phenomena through science, philosophy, mythology and religion.
This natural curiosity has led to the development of advanced tools and skills; humans are the
only known species to build fires, cook their food, clothe themselves, and use numerous other
technologies.

Contents
========



* History
  o Evolution
  o Rise of civilization
  o Habitat and population

* Biology
  o Physiology and genetics
  o Life cycle
  o Diet

* Psychology
  o Consciousness and thought
  o Motivation and emotion
    - Love and sexuality


* Culture
  o Language
  o Art, music and literature
  o Spirituality and religion
  o Philosophy and self-reflection
  o Science and technology
  o Race and ethnicity

* Society
  o Government and politics
    - War

  o Trade and economics

* See also
* References
* External links

History
=======

Evolution
=========



        Main article: Human evolution

Reconstructed skull of Peking Man, a representative of the extinct species believed to be the
nearest ancestor of Homo sapiens, Homo erectus.



The scientific study of human evolution encompasses the development of the genus Homo, but usually
involves studying other hominids and hominines as well, such as Australopithecus. "Modern humans"
are defined as the Homo sapiens species, of which the only extant subspecies is Homo sapiens
sapiens; Homo sapiens idaltu (roughly translated as "elder wise man"), the other known subspecies,
is extinct.[3] Anatomically modern humans appear in the fossil record in Africa about 130,000
years ago.[4][5]

The closest living relatives of Homo sapiens are the two species of chimpanzee: the Bonobo (Pan
paniscus) and the Common Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes). The two species are equally close (they
share the same common ancestor), the main difference between them is the social organization:
matriarchal for the Bonobo and patriarchal for the Common Chimpanzee.[6] Full genome sequencing
resulted in the conclusion that "after 6.5 [million] years of separate evolution, the differences
between bonobo/chimpanzee and human are just 10 times greater than those between two unrelated
people and 10 times less than those between rats and mice". In fact, 98.4% of the DNA sequence is
identical between the two Pan species and human.[6][7][8][9] It has been estimated that the human
lineage diverged from that of chimpanzees about five million years ago, and from gorillas about
eight million years ago. However, a hominid skull discovered in Chad in 2001, classified as
Sahelanthropus tchadensis, is approximately seven million years old, which may indicate an earlier
divergence.[10]

There are two prominent scientific theories of the origins of contemporary humans. They concern
the relationship between modern humans and other hominids. The single-origin, or "out-of-Africa",
hypothesis proposes that modern humans evolved in Africa and later migrated outwards to replace
hominids in other parts of the world. The multiregional hypothesis, on the other hand, proposes
that modern humans evolved, at least in part, from independent hominid populations.[11]

Geneticists Lynn Jorde and Henry Harpending of the University of Utah proposed that the variation
in human DNA is minute compared to that of other species, and that during the Late Pleistocene,
the human population was reduced to a small number of breeding pairs — no more than 10,000 and
possibly as few as 1,000 — resulting in a very small residual gene pool. Various reasons for
this hypothetical bottleneck have been postulated, the most popular being the Toba catastrophe
theory.

Human evolution is characterized by a number of important physiological trends, including the
expansion of the brain cavity and brain itself, which is typically 1,400 cm³ in volume, over
twice that of a chimpanzee or gorilla. The pattern of human postnatal brain growth differs from
that of other apes (heterochrony), allowing for an extended period of social learning and language
acquisition in juvenile humans. Physical anthropologists argue that a reorganization of the
structure of the brain is more important than cranial expansion itself. Other significant
evolutionary changes included a reduction of the canine tooth, development of bipedal locomotion,
and the descent of the larynx and hyoid bone, making speech possible. How these trends are related
and what their role is in the evolution of complex social organization and culture are matters of
ongoing debate.[12][13]

Rise of civilization
====================



        Main article: History of the world

The rise of agriculture led to the foundation of stable human settlements.



The most widely accepted view among current anthropologists is that Homo sapiens originated in the
African savanna around 200,000 BP (Before Present), descending from Homo erectus, had colonized
Eurasia and Oceania by 40,000 BP, and finally colonized the Americas approximately 10,000 years
ago.[14] They displaced Homo neanderthalensis and other species descended from Homo erectus (which
had colonized Eurasia as early as 2 million years ago) through more successful reproduction and
competition for resources.

The earliest humans were hunter-gatherers, a lifestyle well-suited to the savanna. They generally
lived in small, nomadic groups. Around 10,000 years ago, the advent of agriculture prompted the
Neolithic Revolution. Access to a stable food source led to the formation of permanent human
settlements, the domestication of animals, and the use of metal tools. Agriculture also encouraged
trade and cooperation, leading to complex societies. Villages developed into thriving
civilizations in regions such as the Middle East's Fertile Crescent.

Around 6,000 years ago, the first proto-states developed in Mesopotamia, Egypt and the Indus
Valley. Military forces were formed for protection, and government bureaucracies for
administration. States cooperated and competed for resources, in some cases waging wars. Around
2,000 – 3,000 years ago, some states, such as Persia, China, and Rome, developed through
conquest into the first expansive empires. Influential religions, such as the Abrahamic and
Dharmic religions, also rose to prominence at this time.

The late Middle Ages saw the rise of revolutionary ideas and technologies. In China, an advanced
and urbanized economy promoted innovations such as printing and the compass, while the Islamic
Golden Age saw major scientific advancements in Muslim empires. In Europe, the rediscovery of
classical learning and inventions such as the printing press led to the Renaissance in the 14th
century. Over the next 500 years, exploration and imperialistic conquest brought much of the
Americas, Asia, and Africa under European control, leading to later struggles for independence.
The Scientific Revolution in the 17th century and the Industrial Revolution in the 18th – 19th
centuries promoted major innovations in transport, such as the railway and automobile, energy
development, such as coal and electricity, and government, such as representative democracy and
Communism.

As a result of such changes, modern humans live in a world that has become increasingly globalized
and interconnected. Although this has encouraged the growth of science, art, and technology, it
has also led to culture clashes, the development and use of weapons of mass destruction, and
increased environmental destruction and pollution.

Habitat and population
======================



        Main articles: Human genetic history , Demography , and World population

Map of early human migrations according to mitochondrial population genetics (The arctic is at the
centre of the map and the numbers are millennia before present).



Early human settlements were dependent on proximity to water and, depending on the lifestyle,
other natural resources, such as fertile land for growing crops and grazing livestock, or
seasonally by hunting populations of prey. However, humans have a great capacity for altering
their habitats by various methods, such as through irrigation, urban planning, construction,
transport, and manufacturing goods, and with the advent of large-scale trade and transport
infrastructure, proximity to these resources has become unnecessary, and in many places these
factors are no longer a driving force behind the growth and decline of a population. Nonetheless,
the manner in which a habitat is altered is often a major determinant in population change.

Technology has allowed humans to colonize all of the continents and adapt to all climates. Within
the last few decades, humans have explored Antarctica, the ocean depths, and space, although
long-term habitation of these environments is not yet possible. With a population of over six
billion, humans are among the most numerous of the large mammals. Most humans (61%) live in Asia.
The vast majority of the remainder live in the Americas (14%), Africa (13%) and Europe (12%), with
0.5% in Oceania. (See list of countries by population and list of countries by population density.)

Human habitation within closed ecological systems in hostile environments, such as Antarctica and
outer space, is expensive, typically limited in duration, and restricted to scientific, military,
or industrial expeditions. Life in space has been very sporadic, with no more than thirteen humans
in space at any given time. Between 1969 and 1972, two humans at a time spent brief intervals on
the Moon. As of 2007, no other celestial body has been visited by human beings, although there has
been a continuous human presence in outer space since the launch of the initial crew to inhabit
the International Space Station on October 31, 2000.

From AD 1800 to 2000, the human population increased from one to six billion. In 2004, around 2.5
billion out of 6.3 billion people (39.7%) lived in urban areas, and this percentage is expected to
rise throughout the 21st century. Problems for humans living in cities include various forms of
pollution and crime,[15] especially in inner city and suburban slums. Benefits of urban living
include increased literacy, access to the global canon of human knowledge and decreased
susceptibility to rural famines.

Humans have had a dramatic effect on the environment. It has been hypothesized that in the past,
human predation has contributed to the extinction of a number of species; as humans are not
generally preyed on themselves, humans have been described as the ultimate superpredators.[16]
Currently, through land development and pollution, humans are thought to be the main contributor
to global climate change.[17] This is believed to be a major contributor to the ongoing Holocene
extinction event, a mass extinction which, if it continues at its current rate, is predicted to
wipe out half of all species over the next century.[18][19]

Biology
=======



        Main article: Human biology

Physiology and genetics
=======================



        Main articles: Human anatomy , Human physical appearance , and Human genetics

An old diagram of a male human skeleton.



Human body types vary substantially. Although body size is largely determined by genes, it is also
significantly influenced by environmental factors such as diet and exercise. The average height of
an adult human is about 5 to 6 feet (1.5 to 1.8 meters) tall, although this varies significantly
from place to place.[20][21] Humans are capable of fully bipedal locomotion, thus leaving their
arms available for manipulating objects using their hands, aided especially by opposable thumbs.
Because human physiology has not fully adapted to bipedalism, the pelvic region and vertebral
column tend to become worn, creating locomotory difficulties in old age.

Although humans appear relatively hairless compared to other primates, with notable hair growth
occurring chiefly on the top of the head, underarms and pubic area, the average human has more
hair on his or her body than the average chimpanzee. The main distinction is that human hairs are
shorter, finer, and less heavily pigmented than the average chimpanzee's, thus making them harder
to see.[22]

An Inuit woman, circa 1907.



The hue of human hair and skin is determined by the presence of pigments called melanins. Human
skin hues can range from very dark brown to very pale pink, while human hair ranges from blond to
brown to red to, most commonly, black.[23] Most researchers believe that skin darkening was an
adaptation that evolved as a protection against ultraviolet solar radiation, as melanin is an
effective sun-block.[24] The skin pigmentation of contemporary humans is geographically
stratified, and in general correlates with the level of ultraviolet radiation. Human skin also has
a capacity to darken (sun tanning) in response to exposure to ultraviolet radiation.[25][26]

The average sleep requirement is between seven and eight hours a day for an adult and nine to ten
hours for a child; elderly people usually sleep for six to seven hours. Experiencing less sleep
than this is common in modern societies; this sleep deprivation can lead to negative effects. A
sustained restriction of adult sleep to four hours per day has been shown to correlate with
changes in physiology and mental state, including fatigue, aggression, and bodily discomfort.

Humans are a eukaryotic species. Each diploid cell has two sets of 23 chromosomes, each set
received from one parent. There are 22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes. By
present estimates, humans have approximately 20,000 – 25,000 genes. Like other mammals, humans
have an XY sex-determination system, so that females have the sex chromosomes XX and males have
XY. The X chromosome is larger and carries many genes not on the Y chromosome, which means that
recessive diseases associated with X-linked genes, such as hemophilia, affect men more often than
women.

Life cycle
==========

Human embryo at 5 weeks.



The human life cycle is similar to that of other placental mammals. New humans develop
viviparously from conception. An egg is usually fertilized inside the female by sperm from the
male through sexual intercourse, though the recent technology of in vitro fertilization is
occasionally used. The fertilized egg, called a zygote, divides inside the female's uterus to
become an embryo, which over a period of thirty-eight weeks (9 months) of gestation becomes a
human fetus. After this span of time, the fully-grown fetus is expelled from the female's body and
breathes independently as an infant for the first time. At this point, most modern cultures
recognize the baby as a person entitled to the full protection of the law, though some
jurisdictions extend personhood to human fetuses while they remain in the uterus.

Two young human girls.



Compared with that of other species, human childbirth is dangerous. Painful labors lasting
twenty-four hours or more are not uncommon, and may result in injury, or even death, to the child
or mother. This is because of both the relatively large fetal head circumference (for housing the
brain) and the mother's relatively narrow pelvis (a trait required for successful bipedalism, by
way of natural selection).[27][28] The chances of a successful labour increased significantly
during the 20th century in wealthier countries with the advent of new medical technologies. In
contrast, pregnancy and natural childbirth remains a relatively hazardous ordeal in developing
regions of the world, with maternal death rates approximately 100 times as common as in developed
countries.[29]

An elderly man.



In developed countries, infants are typically 3 – 4 kilograms (6 – 9 pounds) in weight and 50
– 60 centimeters (20 – 24 inches) in height at birth.[30] However, low birth weight is common
in developing countries, and contributes to the high levels of infant mortality in these
regions.[31] Helpless at birth, humans continue to grow for some years, typically reaching sexual
maturity at 12 to 15 years of age. Human girls continue to grow physically until around the age of
18, and human boys until around age 21. The human life span can be split into a number of stages:
infancy, childhood, adolescence, young adulthood, adulthood and old age. The lengths of these
stages, however — particularly the later ones — are not fixed.

There are striking differences in life expectancy around the world. The developed world is quickly
getting older, with the median age around 40 years (highest in Monaco at 45.1 years), while in the
developing world, the median age is 15 – 20 years (lowest in Uganda at 14.8 years). Life
expectancy at birth in Hong Kong, China is 84.8 years for a female and 78.9 for a male, while in
Swaziland, mostly because of AIDS, it is 31.3 years for both sexes.[32] While one in five
Europeans is 60 years of age or older, only one in twenty Africans is 60 years of age or older.[33]

The number of centenarians (humans of age 100 years or older) in the world was estimated by the
United Nations at 210,000 in 2002.[34] At least one person, Jeanne Calment, is known to have
reached the age of 122 years; higher ages have been claimed but they are not well substantiated.
Worldwide, there are 81 men aged 60 or older for every 100 women of that age group, and among the
oldest, there are 53 men for every 100 women.

The philosophical questions of when human personhood begins and whether it persists after death
are the subject of considerable debate. The prospect of death causes unease or fear for most
humans. Burial ceremonies are characteristic of human societies, often inspired by beliefs in an
afterlife or immortality.

Diet
====


Early Homo sapiens employed a "hunter-gatherer" methodology as their primary means of food
collection, involving combining stationary plant and fungal food sources (such as fruits, grains,
tubers, and mushrooms) with wild game which must be hunted and killed in order to be consumed. It
is believed that humans have used fire to prepare and cook food prior to eating since the time of
their divergence from Homo erectus. However, a small number of individuals choose a raw foodist
approach, consuming little to no cooked food; the raw diet may be fruitarian, vegetarian, or
omnivorous. As well, some humans have chosen to abstain from eating some, or all meat. Such
abstinence has been performed for religious, ethical, ecological, or health reasons.

Humans are capable of consuming both plant and animal products. However, it is heavily debated
whether humans are actually herbivorous, carnivorous, or omnivorous. Some people claim that humans
share numerous physical traits with herbivorous species,[35] while others claim humans are much
more similar to carnivores.[36] At the same time the human digestive system is not completely
adapted to plant matter or meat, leading many to classify humans as omnivorous.

The human diet is prominently reflected in human culture, and has led to the development of food
science. In general, humans can survive for two to eight weeks without food, depending on stored
body fat. Survival without water is usually limited to three or four days. Lack of food remains a
serious problem, with about 300,000 people starving to death every year.[37] Childhood
malnutrition is also common and contributes to the global burden of disease.[38] However global
food distribution is not even, and obesity among some human populations has increased to almost
epidemic proportions, leading to health complications and increased mortality in some developed,
and a few developing countries. The United States Center for Disease Control states that 32% of
American adults over the age of 20 are obese, while 66.5% are obese or overweight. Obesity is
caused by consuming more calories than are expended, with many attributing excessive weight gain
to a combination of overeating and insufficient exercise.

At least ten thousand years ago, humans developed agriculture,[39] which has substantially altered
the kind of food people eat. This has led to increased populations, the development of cities, and
because of increased population density, the wider spread of infectious diseases. The types of
food consumed, and the way in which they are prepared, has varied widely by time, location, and
culture.

Psychology
==========



        Main articles: Human brain and Mind

The human brain.



The human brain is the center of the central nervous system in humans, as well as the primary
control center for the peripheral nervous system. The brain controls "lower", or involuntary,
autonomic activities such as the respiration, and digestion. The brain also controls "higher"
order, conscious activities, such as thought, reasoning, and abstraction.[40] These cognitive
processes constitute the mind, and, along with their behavioral consequences, are studied in the
field of psychology.

The human brain is generally regarded as more capable of these higher order activities, and more
"intelligent" in general, than that of any other species. While other animals are capable of
creating structures and using simple tools — mostly as a result of instinct and learning through
mimicry — human technology is vastly more complex, constantly evolving and improving with time.
Even the most ancient human tools and structures are far more advanced than any structure or tool
created by any other animal.[41]

Consciousness and thought
=========================



        Main articles: Consciousness and Cognition

The human ability to think abstractly may be unparalleled in the animal kingdom. Humans are one of
only six species to pass the mirror test — which tests whether an animal recognizes its
reflection as an image of itself — along with chimpanzees, orangutans, dolphins, and possibly
pigeons. In October 2006, three elephants at the Bronx Zoo also passed this test.[42] Humans under
the age of 2 typically fail this test.[43] However, this may be a matter of degree rather than a
sharp divide. Monkeys have been trained to apply abstract rules in tasks.[44]

The brain perceives the external world through the senses, and each individual human is influenced
greatly by his or her experiences, leading to subjective views of existence and the passage of
time.

Humans are variously said to possess consciousness, self-awareness, and a mind, which correspond
roughly to the mental processes of thought. These are said to possess qualities such as
self-awareness, sentience, sapience, and the ability to perceive the relationship between oneself
and one's environment. The extent to which the mind constructs or experiences the outer world is a
matter of debate, as are the definitions and validity of many of the terms used above. The
philosopher of cognitive science Daniel Dennett, for example, argues that there is no such thing
as a narrative centre called the "mind", but that instead there is simply a collection of sensory
inputs and outputs: different kinds of "software" running in parallel.[45]

Humans study the more physical aspects of the mind and brain, and by extension of the nervous
system, in the field of neurology, the more behavioral in the field of psychology, and a sometimes
loosely-defined area between in the field of psychiatry, which treats mental illness and
behavioral disorders. Psychology does not necessarily refer to the brain or nervous system, and
can be framed purely in terms of phenomenological or information processing theories of the mind.
Increasingly, however, an understanding of brain functions is being included in psychological
theory and practice, particularly in areas such as artificial intelligence, neuropsychology, and
cognitive neuroscience.

The nature of thought is central to psychology and related fields. Cognitive psychology studies
cognition, the mental processes underlying behavior. It uses information processing as a framework
for understanding the mind. Perception, learning, problem solving, memory, attention, language and
emotion are all well-researched areas as well. Cognitive psychology is associated with a school of
thought known as cognitivism, whose adherents argue for an information processing model of mental
function, informed by positivism and experimental psychology. Techniques and models from cognitive
psychology are widely applied and form the mainstay of psychological theories in many areas of
both research and applied psychology. Largely focusing on the development of the human mind
through the life span, developmental psychology seeks to understand how people come to perceive,
understand, and act within the world and how these processes change as they age. This may focus on
intellectual, cognitive, neural, social, or moral development.

Some philosophers divide consciousness into phenomenal consciousness, which is experience itself,
and access consciousness, which is the processing of the things in experience[46] Phenomenal
consciousness is the state of being conscious, such as when we say "I am conscious." Access
consciousness is being conscious of something in relation to abstract concepts, such as when one
says "I am conscious of these words." Various forms of access consciousness include awareness,
self-awareness, conscience, stream of consciousness, Husserl's phenomenology, and intentionality.
The concept of phenomenal consciousness, in modern history, according to some, is closely related
to the concept of qualia.

Social psychology links sociology with psychology in their shared study of the nature and causes
of human social interaction, with an emphasis on how people think towards each other and how they
relate to each other. The behavior and mental processes, both human and non-human, can be
described through animal cognition, ethology, evolutionary psychology, and comparative psychology
as well. Human ecology is an academic discipline that investigates how humans and human societies
interact with both their natural environment and the human social environment.

Motivation and emotion
======================



        Main articles: Motivation and Emotion

Goya's Tio Paquete (1820).



Motivation is the driving force of desire behind all deliberate actions of human beings.
Motivation is based on emotion — specifically, on the search for satisfaction (positive
emotional experiences), and the avoidance of conflict; positive and negative are defined by the
individual brain state, not by social norms: a person may be driven to self-injury or violence
because their brain is conditioned to create a positive response to these actions. Motivation is
important because it is involved in the performance of all learned responses.

Within psychology, conflict avoidance and the libido are seen to be primary motivators. Within
economics motivation is often seen to be based on financial incentives, moral incentives, or
coercive incentives. Religions generally posit divine or demonic influences.

Happiness, or being happy, is a human emotional condition. The definition of happiness is a common
philosophical topic. Some people might define it as the best condition which a human can have —
a condition of mental and physical health. Others may define it as freedom from want and distress;
consciousness of the good order of things; assurance of one's place in the universe or society,
inner peace, and so forth.

Human emotion has a significant influence on, or can even be said to control, human behavior,
though historically many cultures and philosophers have for various reasons discouraged allowing
this influence to go unchecked.

Emotional experiences perceived as pleasant, like love, admiration, or joy, contrast with those
perceived as unpleasant, like hate, envy, or sorrow. There is often a distinction seen between
refined emotions, which are socially learned, and survival oriented emotions, which are thought to
be innate.

Human exploration of emotions as separate from other neurological phenomena is worthy of note,
particularly in those cultures where emotion is considered separate from physiological state. In
some cultural medical theories, to provide an example, emotion is considered so synonymous with
certain forms of physical health that no difference is thought to exist. The Stoics believed
excessive emotion was harmful, while some Sufi teachers (in particular, the poet and astronomer
Omar Khayyám) felt certain extreme emotions could yield a conceptual perfection, what is often
translated as ecstasy.

In modern scientific thought, certain refined emotions are considered to be a complex neural trait
of many domesticated and a few non-domesticated mammals, developed commonly in reaction to
superior survival mechanisms and intelligent interaction with each other and the environment; as
such, refined emotion is not in all cases as discrete and separate from natural neural function as
was once assumed. Still, when humans function in civilized tandem, it has been noted that
uninhibited acting on extreme emotion can lead to social disorder and crime.

Love and sexuality
==================



        Main articles: Love and Human sexuality

Rodin's "The Kiss"



Human sexuality, besides ensuring biological reproduction, has important social functions: it
creates physical intimacy, bonds and hierarchies among individuals; may be directed to spiritual
transcendence; and in a hedonistic sense to the enjoyment of activity involving sexual
gratification. Sexual desire, or libido, is experienced as a bodily urge, often accompanied by
strong emotions such as love, ecstasy and jealousy.

As with other human self-descriptions, humans propose that it is high intelligence and complex
societies of humans that have produced the most complex sexual behaviors of any animal, including
a great many behaviors that are not directly connected with reproduction.

Human sexual choices are usually made in reference to cultural norms, which vary widely.
Restrictions are sometimes determined by religious beliefs or social customs.

Many sexologists believe that the majority of Homo sapiens have the inherent capacity to be
attracted to both males and females (a kind of universal potential bisexuality). In a variation of
this, pioneering researcher Sigmund Freud believed that humans are born polymorphously perverse,
which means that any number of objects could be a source of pleasure. According to Freud, humans
then pass through five stages of psychosexual development (and can fixate on any stage because of
various traumas during the process). For Alfred Kinsey, another influential sex researcher, people
can fall anywhere along a continuous scale of sexual orientation (with only small minorities fully
heterosexual or homosexual). Recent studies of neurology and genetics suggest people may be born
with one sexual orientation or another, so there is not currently a clear consensus among sex
researchers.[47][48]

Culture
=======



        Main article: Culture

Culture is defined here as a set of distinctive material, intellectual, emotional, and spiritual
features of a social group, including art, literature, lifestyles, value systems, traditions,
rituals, and beliefs. The link between human biology and human behavior and culture is often very
close, making it difficult to clearly divide topics into one area or the other; as such, the
placement of some subjects may be based primarily on convention.

Culture consists of values, social norms, and artifacts. A culture's values define what it holds
to be important or ethical. Closely linked are norms, expectations of how people ought to behave,
bound by tradition. Artifacts, or "material culture", are objects derived from the culture's
values, norms, and understanding of the world.

Language
========



        Main article: Language

The capacity humans have to transfer concepts, ideas and notions through speech and writing is
unrivaled in known species. The faculty of speech is a defining feature of humanity, possibly
predating phylogenetic separation of the modern population (see origin of language). Language is
central to the communication between humans, as well as being central to the sense of identity
that unites nations, cultures and ethnic groups.

The invention of writing systems around 5000 years ago allowed the preservation of language on
material objects, and was a major step in cultural evolution. Language is closely tied to ritual
and religion (c.f. mantra, sacred text).

The science of linguistics describes the structure of language and the relationship between
languages. There are approximately 6,000 different languages currently in use, including sign
languages, and many thousands more that are considered extinct.

Art, music and literature
=========================



        Main articles: Art , Music , and Literature

Allegory of Music (ca. 1594), a painting of a woman writing sheet music by Lorenzo Lippi.



Artistic works have existed for almost as long as humankind, from early pre-historic art to
contemporary art. Art is one of the most unusual aspects of human behavior and a key
distinguishing feature of humans from other species.

As a form of cultural expression by humans, art may be defined by the pursuit of diversity and the
usage of narratives of liberation and exploration (i.e. art history, art criticism, and art
theory) to mediate its boundaries. This distinction may be applied to objects or performances,
current or historical, and its prestige extends to those who made, found, exhibit, or own them.

In the modern use of the word, art is commonly understood to be the process or result of making
material works which, from concept to creation, adhere to the "creative impulse" — that is, art
is distinguished from other works by being in large part unprompted by necessity, by biological
drive, or by any undisciplined pursuit of recreation.

Music is a natural intuitive phenomenon based on the three distinct and interrelated organization
structures of rhythm, harmony, and melody. Listening to music is perhaps the most common and
universal form of entertainment for humans, while learning and understanding it are popular
disciplines. There are a wide variety of music genres and ethnic musics.

Literature, the body of written — and possibly oral — works, especially creative ones,
includes prose, poetry and drama, both fiction and non-fiction. Literature includes such genres as
epic, legend, myth, ballad, and folklore.

Spirituality and religion
=========================



        Main articles: Spirituality and Religion

Sculpture of a man meditating.

The largest religious gathering of humans in history. Around 70 million people from around the
world participated in Kumbh Mela at the Hindu holy city of Prayaga, India.



Spirituality, belief or involvement in matters of the soul or spirit, is one of the many different
approaches humans take in trying to answer fundamental questions about mankind's place in the
universe, the meaning of life, and the ideal way to live one's life. Though these topics have also
been addressed by philosophy, and to some extent by science, spirituality is unique in that it
focuses on mystical or supernatural concepts such as karma and God. However, critics would argue
that spirituality does not actually answer any questions, and complicates the issues further by
raising more questions.[49]

A more organized, but related, concept is religion — sometimes used interchangeably with "faith"
— which is commonly defined as a belief system concerning the supernatural, sacred, or divine,
and the moral codes, practices, values, institutions and rituals associated with such belief. In
the course of its development, religion has taken on many forms that vary by culture and
individual perspective.

Some of the chief questions and issues religions are concerned with include life after death
(commonly involving belief in an afterlife), the origin of life (the source of a variety of origin
beliefs), the nature of the universe (religious cosmology) and its ultimate fate (eschatology),
and what is moral or immoral. A common source in religions for answers to these questions are
transcendent divine beings such as deities or a singular God, although not all religions are
theistic — many are nontheistic or ambiguous on the topic, particularly among the Eastern
religions.

Although a majority of humans profess some variety of spiritual or religious belief, some are
irreligious, lacking or rejecting belief in the supernatural or spiritual. Additionally, although
most religions and spiritual beliefs are clearly distinct from science on both a philosophical and
methodological level, the two are not generally considered to be mutually exclusive; a majority of
humans hold a mix of both scientific and religious views. The distinction between philosophy and
religion, on the other hand, is at times less clear, and the two are linked in such fields as the
philosophy of religion and theology.

Philosophy and self-reflection
==============================



        Main articles: Philosophy , Human self-reflection , and Human nature

Plato and Aristotle in a detail from The School of Athens by Raphael.

The Thinker, Artist's rendering of the sculpture by Auguste Rodin.



Philosophy is a discipline or field of study involving the investigation, analysis, and
development of ideas at a general, abstract, or fundamental level. It is the discipline searching
for a general understanding of values and reality by chiefly speculative means.

The core philosophical disciplines are logic, ontology or metaphysics, epistemology, and axiology,
which includes the branches of ethics and aesthetics. Philosophy covers a very wide range of
approaches, and is also used to refer to a worldview, to a perspective on an issue, or to the
positions argued for by a particular philosopher or school of philosophy.

Metaphysics is a branch of philosophy concerned with the study of first principles, being and
existence (ontology). In between the doctrines of religion and science, stands the philosophical
perspective of metaphysical cosmology. This ancient field of study seeks to draw logical
conclusions about the nature of the universe, humanity, god, and/or their connections based on the
extension of some set of presumed facts borrowed from religion and/or observation.

Humans often consider themselves to be the dominant species on Earth, and the most advanced in
intelligence and ability to manage their environment. This belief is especially strong in modern
Western culture. Alongside such claims of dominance is often found radical pessimism because of
the frailty and brevity of human life.

Humanism is a philosophy which defines a socio-political doctrine the bounds of which are not
constrained by those of locally developed cultures, but which seeks to include all of humanity and
all issues common to human beings. Because spiritual beliefs of a community often manifests as
religious doctrine, the history of which is as factious as it is unitive, secular humanism grew as
an answer to the need for a common philosophy that transcended the cultural boundaries of local
moral codes and religions. Many humanists are religious, however, and see humanism as simply a
mature expression of a common truth present in most religions. Humanists affirm the possibility of
an objective truth and accept that human perception of that truth is imperfect. The most basic
tenets of humanism are that humans matter and can solve human problems, and that science, freedom
of speech, rational thought, democracy, and freedom in the arts are worthy pursuits or goals for
all peoples. Humanism depends chiefly on reason and logic without consideration for the
supernatural.

Science and technology
======================



        Main articles: Science and Technology

In the mid- to late 20th century, humans achieved a level of technological mastery sufficient to
leave the atmosphere of Earth for the first time, explore space and walk on the moon.



Science is the discovery of knowledge about the world by verifiable means. Technology is the
objects humans make to serve their purposes.

Human cultures are both characterized and differentiated by the objects that they make and use.
Archaeology attempts to tell the story of past or lost cultures in part by close examination of
the artifacts they produced. Early humans left stone tools, pottery and jewelry that are
particular to various regions and times.

Improvements in technology are passed from one culture to another. For instance, the cultivation
of crops arose in several different locations, but quickly spread to be an almost ubiquitous
feature of human life. Similarly, advances in weapons, architecture and metallurgy are quickly
disseminated.

Such techniques can be passed on by oral tradition. The development of writing, itself a kind of
technology, made it possible to pass information from generation to generation and from region to
region with greater accuracy.

Together, these developments made possible the commencement of civilization and urbanization, with
their inherently complex social arrangements. Eventually this led to the institutionalization of
the development of new technology, and the associated understanding of the way the world
functions. This science now forms a central part of human culture.

In recent times, physics and astrophysics have come to play a central role in shaping what is now
known as physical cosmology, that is, the understanding of the universe through scientific
observation and experiment. This discipline, which focuses on the universe as it exists on the
largest scales and at the earliest times, begins by arguing for the big bang, a sort of cosmic
expansion from which the universe itself is said to have erupted ~13.7 ± 0.2 billion (109) years
ago. After its violent beginnings and until its very end, scientists then propose that the entire
history of the universe has been an orderly progression governed by physical laws.

Race and ethnicity
==================



        Main articles: Race and Ethnic group

Humans often categorize themselves in terms of race or ethnicity, although the validity of human
races as true biological categories is questionable.[50] Human racial categories are based on both
ancestry and visible traits, especially skin color and facial features. These categories may also
carry some information on non-visible biological traits, such as the risk of developing particular
diseases such as sickle-cell disease.[51]

Genetic studies have demonstrated that humans on the African continent are most genetically
diverse (Y-chromosome and MtDNA lineages).[52] However, compared to many other animals, human gene
sequences are remarkably homogeneous. It has been claimed that the majority of genetic variation
occurs within "racial groups", with only 5 to 15% of total variation occurring between racial
groups.[53] However, this remains an area of active debate.[54][55]

Ethnic groups, on the other hand, are more often linked by linguistic, cultural, ancestral, and
national or regional ties. Self-identification with an ethnic group is based on kinship and
descent. Race and ethnicity can lead to variant treatment and impact social identity, giving rise
to racism and the theory of identity politics.

Society
=======



        Main article: Society

Society is the system of organizations and institutions arising from interaction between humans.

Government and politics
=======================



        Main articles: Government , Politics , and State

The United Nations building in New York City, which houses one of the largest human political
organizations in the world.



A state is an organized political community occupying a definite territory, having an organized
government, and possessing internal and external sovereignty. Recognition of the state's claim to
independence by other states, enabling it to enter into international agreements, is often
important to the establishment of its statehood. The "state" can also be defined in terms of
domestic conditions, specifically, as conceptualized by Max Weber, "a state is a human community
that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the 'legitimate' use of physical force within a given
territory."[56]

Government can be defined as the political means of creating and enforcing laws; typically via a
bureaucratic hierarchy.

Politics is the process by which decisions are made within groups. Although the term is generally
applied to behavior within governments, politics is also observed in all human group interactions,
including corporate, academic, and religious institutions. Many different political systems exist,
as do many different ways of understanding them, and many definitions overlap. The most common
form of government worldwide is a republic, however other examples include monarchy, social
democracy, military dictatorship and theocracy.

All of these issues have a direct relationship with economics.

War
===

The atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki immediately killed over 120,000 humans.

        Main article: War

War is a state of widespread conflict between states, organizations, or relatively large groups of
people, which is characterized by the use of lethal violence between combatants or upon civilians.
It is estimated that during the 20th Century between 167 and 188 million humans died as a result
of war.[57]

A common perception of war is a series of military campaigns between at least two opposing sides
involving a dispute over sovereignty, territory, resources, religion or other issues. A war said
to liberate an occupied country is sometimes characterized as a "war of liberation", while a war
between internal elements of a state is a civil war.

There have been a wide variety of rapidly advancing tactics throughout the history of war, ranging
from conventional war to asymmetric warfare to total war and unconventional warfare. Techniques
have nearly always included hand to hand combat, the use of ranged weapons, propaganda, Shock and
Awe, and ethnic cleansing. Military intelligence has always played a key role in determining
victory and defeat. In modern warfare, soldiers and armoured fighting vehicles are used to control
the land, warships the sea, and air power the sky. Outer space has recently become an important
factor in warfare as well, although no actual warfare is currently carried out in space. War is a
strong catalyst in politics, history and technology. Important inventions such as medicine,
navigation, metallurgy, mass production, nuclear power and computers having been completely or
partially driven by war.]

Throughout history there has been a constant struggle between defense and offense, armour, and the
weapons designed to breach it. Modern examples include the bunker buster bomb, and the bunkers
which they are designed to destroy.

Trade and economics
===================



        Main articles: Trade and Economics

Buyers bargain for good prices while sellers put forth their best front in Chichicastenango
Market, Guatemala.



Trade is the voluntary exchange of goods, services, or both, and a form of economics. A mechanism
that allows trade is called a market. The original form of trade was barter, the direct exchange
of goods and services. Modern traders instead generally negotiate through a medium of exchange,
such as money. As a result, buying can be separated from selling, or earning. The invention of
money (and later credit, paper money and non-physical money) greatly simplified and promoted trade.

Trade exists for many reasons. Because of specialization and division of labor, most people
concentrate on a small aspect of manufacturing or service, trading their labour for products.
Trade exists between regions because different regions have an absolute or comparative advantage
in the production of some tradable commodity, or because different regions' size allows for the
benefits of mass production. As such, trade between locations benefits both locations.

Economics is a social science that studies the production, distribution, trade and consumption of
goods and services.

Economics, which focuses on measurable variables, is broadly divided into two main branches:
microeconomics, which deals with individual agents, such as households and businesses, and
macroeconomics, which considers the economy as a whole, in which case it considers aggregate
supply and demand for money, capital and commodities. Aspects receiving particular attention in
economics are resource allocation, production, distribution, trade, and competition. Economic
logic is increasingly applied to any problem that involves choice under scarcity or determining
economic value. Mainstream economics focuses on how prices reflect supply and demand, and uses
equations to predict consequences of decisions.

See also
========


* List of fossil sites (with link directory)
* List of hominina (hominid) fossils (with images)
* List of human time periods

