Dog
===

This article is about the domestic dog. Dog

Pleistocene



other images of dogs

Domesticated



Domain: Eukaryota

Kingdom: Animalia

Phylum: Chordata

Class: Mammalia

Order: Carnivora

Family: Canidae

Genus: Canis

Species: C. lupus

Subspecies: C. l. familiaris



Trinomial name

Canis lupus familiaris

 Dogs Portal


The dog (Canis lupus familiaris) is a domestic subspecies of the wolf, a mammal of the Canidae
family of the order Carnivora. The term encompasses both feral and pet variants. It is also
sometimes used to describe wild canids of other subspecies or species.

Over time, the dog has developed into hundreds of breeds with a great degree of variation. For
example, heights at the withers range from just a few inches (such as the Chihuahua) to roughly
three feet (such as the Irish Wolfhound); colors vary from white through grays (usually called
blue) to black, and browns from light (tan) to dark ("red" or "chocolate") in a tremendous
variation of patterns; and coats can be anything from very short to several centimeters long, from
coarse hair to something akin to wool, straight or curly, or smooth.

Contents
========



* Overview
  o Origins
  o Human relationships

* Terminology
* Intelligence
  o Evaluation of a dog's intelligence

* Physical characteristics
  o Sight
  o Hearing
  o Smell

* Working, utility and assistance dogs
* Show and sport (competition) dogs
* Diet
  o Dangerous substances

* Reproduction
  o General
  o Males
  o Females
  o Copulation
  o Gestation and litters

* Spaying and neutering
* Overpopulation
* Dog health
  o Diseases
  o Parasites
  o Common physical disorders
  o Lifespan and old age

* Behavior
  o Laughter in dogs

* Dog communication
* Ancestry and history of domestication
  o Wolf ancestors
  o Speed of domestication

* Dog meat for human consumption
* Dog abuse
  o Signs of dog abuse

* Famous dogs &amp; dog sayings
* Dog breeds
  o Neoteny in the rapid evolution of diverse dog breeds
  o Breed popularity

* See also
* References
* Further reading
* External links

Overview
========

Origins
=======



        Main article: Origin of the domestic dog

Some research appears to show that dogs were domesticated from wolves as recently as 15,000 years
ago,[1] or perhaps as early as 100,000 years ago based upon recent genetic, fossil and DNA
evidence.[2] Other research suggests that dogs have only been domesticated for a much shorter
amount of time and were domesticated from populations of wild dogs, which had previously diverged
from wolves.[3][4]

New evidence suggests that dogs were first domesticated in East Asia, possibly China,[5] and the
first peoples to enter North America took dogs with them from Asia. Genetic research has
identified 14 ancient dog breeds, with the oldest being the Chow Chow, Shar Pei, Akita Inu, Shiba
Inu and Basenji. Because many of the 14 breeds are associated with China and Japan, the theory
that the dog originated in Asia seems to be likely.[5]

As humans migrated around the planet a variety of dog forms migrated with them. The agricultural
revolution and subsequent urban revolution led to an increase in the dog population and a demand
for specialization. These circumstances would provide the opportunity for selective breeding to
create specialized working dogs and pets.

Human relationships
===================


Dogs, like humans, are highly social animals and this similarity in their overall behavioral
pattern accounts for their trainability, playfulness, and ability to fit into human households and
social situations. This similarity has earned dogs a unique position in the realm of interspecies
relationships.

The loyalty and devotion that dogs demonstrate as part of their natural instincts as pack animals
closely mimics the human idea of love and friendship, leading many dog owners to view their pets
as full-fledged family members. Conversely, dogs seem to view their human companions as members of
their pack, and make few, if any, distinctions between their owners and fellow dogs. Dogs fill a
variety of roles in human society and are often trained as working dogs. For dogs that do not have
traditional jobs, a wide range of dog sports provide the opportunity to exhibit their natural
skills. In many countries, the most common and perhaps most important role of dogs is as
companions.

Dogs have lived with and worked with humans in so many roles that their loyalty has earned them
the unique sobriquet "man's best friend".[6] However, some cultures consider dogs to be unclean.
In some parts of the world, dogs are raised as livestock to produce dog meat for human
consumption. In many places, consumption of dog meat is discouraged by social convention or
cultural taboo.

Terminology
===========


The English word dog, in common usage, refers to the domestic pet dog, Canis lupus familiaris. The
species was originally classified as Canis familiaris by Linnaeus in 1758. In 1993, dogs were
reclassified as a subspecies of the gray wolf, Canis lupus, by the Smithsonian Institution and the
American Society of Mammalogists. "Dog" is sometimes used to refer collectively to any mammal
belonging to the family Canidae (as in "the dog family"), such as wolves, foxes, and coyotes. Some
members of the family have "dog" in their common names, such as the African Wild Dog. The
constellations Canes Venatici, Canis Major and Canis Minor are named from the Latin word for
"dog," for their perceived resemblance to dogs.

The English word dog might derive from the Old English docga, a "powerful breed of canine". The
French dogue and Spanish dogo as in dogo Argentino are borrowings from English. The English word
hound is a cognate of the German Hund and Dutch hond which, though referring to a specific breed
in English, means "dog" in general in German and Dutch. Hound itself derives from the
Proto-Indo-European *kwon-, which is the direct root of the Greek ÎºÏ…Ï‰Î½ (kuÅ?n) and the
indirect root of the Latin canis through the variant form *kani-.[7]

In breeding circles, a male canine is referred to as a dog, while a female canine is called a
bitch. Offspring are generally called pups or puppies until they are about a year old. A group of
offspring is a litter. The process of birth is whelping. Many terms are used for dogs that are not
purebred.

Intelligence
============



        Main article: Dog intelligence

Many dogs can easily be trained to retrieve.



Among dog lovers, dogs are generally valued for their intelligence, and both anecdotal evidence
and scientific research suggest that dogs have a reasonably high intelligence. This intelligence
is expressed differently with different breeds and individuals, however. For example, Border
Collies are noted for their ability to learn commands, while other breeds may not be so motivated
towards obedience, but instead show their cleverness in devising ways to steal food or escape from
a yard. Being highly adaptable animals themselves, dogs have learned to do a great number of very
eclectic jobs as humans have required over the generations. Dogs are employed in various roles
across the globe, proving invaluable assets in areas such as search-and-rescue; law enforcement
(including attack dogs, sniffer dogs and tracking dogs); guards for livestock, people or property;
herding; Arctic exploration sled-pullers; guiding the blind and acting as a pair of ears for the
deaf; assisting with hunting, and a great many other roles which they may be trained to assume.
Most dogs rarely have to deal with complex tasks and are unlikely to learn relatively complicated
activities (such as opening doors) unaided. Some dogs (such as guide dogs for the visually
impaired) are specially trained to recognize and avoid dangerous situations.

Evaluation of a dog's intelligence
==================================


The meaning of "intelligence" in general, not only in reference to dogs, is hard to define. Some
tests measure problem-solving abilities and others test the ability to learn in comparison to
others of the same age. Defining it for dogs is just as difficult. It is likely that dogs do not
have the ability to premeditate an action to solve a problem. Some dogs may, however, have more
drive to keep trying various things until they accidentally reach a solution and still others
might have more ability to make the association between the "accident" and the result.]

For example, the ability to learn quickly could be a sign of intelligence. Conversely it could be
interpreted as a sign of blind subservience and a desire to please. In contrast, some dogs who do
not learn very quickly may have other talents. An example is breeds that are not particularly
interested in pleasing their owners, such as Siberian Huskies. Huskies are often fascinated with
the myriad of possibilities for escaping from yards, catching small animals, and often figuring
out on their own numerous inventive ways of doing both.

Assistance dogs are also required to be obedient at all times. This means they must learn a
tremendous number of commands, understand how to act in a large variety of situations, and
recognize threats to their human companion, some of which they might never before have encountered.

Many owners of livestock guardian breeds believe that breeds like the Great Pyrenees or the Kuvasz
are not easily trained because their stubborn nature prevents them from seeing the point of such
commands as â€œsitâ€? or â€œdownâ€?. Hounds may also suffer from this type of ranking. In fact
several rank in the bottom tier of "The Intelligence of Dogs" list (such as Beagles, Bloodhounds,
and Basset Hounds).] These dogs are bred to have more of a "pack" mentality with other dogs and
less reliance on a master's direct commands. While they may not have the same kind of intelligence
as a Border Collie, they were not bred to learn and obey commands quickly, but to think for
themselves while trailing game.

Physical characteristics
========================



        Main article: Dog anatomy

Some dogs, like this Weimaraner, have their predatory instincts suppressed in order to better
assist human hunters.



        See also: Dog health

Modern dog breeds show more variation in size, appearance, and behavior than any other domestic
animal. Within the range of extremes, dogs generally share attributes with their wild ancestors,
the wolves. Dogs are predators and scavengers, possessing sharp teeth and strong jaws for
attacking, holding, and tearing their food. Although selective breeding has changed the appearance
of many breeds, all dogs retain basic traits from their distant ancestors. Like many other
predatory mammals, the dog has powerful muscles, fused wristbones, a cardiovascular system that
supports both sprinting and endurance, and teeth for catching and tearing. Compared to the bone
structure of the human foot, dogs technically walk on their toes.

Sight
=====

Amazonian dogs, such as this one from Alto Amazonas, Peru are critical for indigenous peoples'
hunting strategies, particularly in the rain forest.



Like most mammals, dogs are dichromats and have color vision equivalent to red-green color
blindness in humans.[8][9]

Different breeds of dogs have different eye shapes and dimensions, and they also have different
retina configurations.[10] Dogs with long noses have a "visual streak" which runs across the width
of the retina and gives them a very wide field of excellent vision, while those with short noses
have an "area centralis" -- a central patch with up to three times the density of nerve endings as
the visual streak -- giving them detailed sight much more like a human's.

Some breeds, particularly the best sighthounds, have a field of vision up to 270Â° (compared to
180Â° for humans), although broad-headed breeds with short noses have a much narrower field of
vision, as low as 180Â°.[8][9]

Hearing
=======

This Collie/Saluki crossbreed angles her ears to find the source of a sound.



Dogs detect sounds as low as the 16 to 20Hz frequency range (compared to 20 to 70 Hz for humans)
and above 45 kHz[11] (compared to 13 to 20 kHz for humans),[9] and in addition have a degree of
ear mobility that helps them to rapidly pinpoint the exact location of a sound. Eighteen or more
muscles can tilt, rotate and raise or lower a dog's ear. Additionally, a dog can identify a
sound's location much faster than a human can, as well as hear sounds up to four times the
distance that humans are able to. Those with more natural ear shapes, like those of wild canids
like the fox, generally hear better than those with the floppier ears of many domesticated species.

Smell
=====


Dogs have nearly 220 million smell-sensitive cells over an area about the size of a pocket
handkerchief (compared to 5 million over an area the size of a postage stamp for humans). Some
breeds have been selectively bred for excellence in detecting scents, even compared to their
canine brethren. What information a dog actually detects when he is scenting is not perfectly
understood; although once a matter of debate, it now seems to be well established that dogs can
distinguish two different types of scents when trailing, an air scent from some person or thing
that has recently passed by, as well as a ground scent that remains detectable for a much longer
period. The characteristics and behavior of these two types of scent trail would seem, after some
thought, to be quite different, the air scent being intermittent but perhaps less obscured by
competing scents, whereas the ground scent would be relatively permanent with respect to careful
and repetitive search by the dog, but would seem to be much more contaminated with other scents.
In any event, it is established by those who train tracking dogs that it is impossible to teach
the dog how to track any better than it does naturally; the object instead is to motivate it
properly, and teach it to maintain focus on a single track and ignore any others that might
otherwise seem of greater interest to an untrained dog. An intensive search for a scent, for
instance searching a ship for contraband, can actually be very fatiguing for a dog, and the dog
must be motivated to continue this hard work for a long period of time.

Working, utility and assistance dogs
====================================



        Main article: Working dog

There are several types of working dogs:

* Assistance dogs which help the seeing and hearing-impaired. Others are trained to help those
  with epilepsy and psychiatric disorders, by detecting the onset of the condition so they can
  seek help. The typical assistance dog is a sociable breed such as a Labrador Retriever.
* The detection dog, which is a dog trained to and works at using its senses (almost always the
  sense of smell) to detect substances such as explosives or illegal drugs.
* Guard dogs trained to protect property. These are commonly Doberman Pinschers, German
  Shepherds and Rottweilers or mixes of these breeds.
* Herding dogs trained to protect livestock in the range against predators. Sheepdogs are a
  common breed.
* Hunting dogs that search for and retrieve game. Pointers and retrievers are typical hunting
  breeds.
* Police dogs, typically German Shepherds, are trained to assist law enforcement officers.
* Rescue dogs that search for missing humans. The archetypal breeds are the St. Bernard and the
  Bloodhound, although any dog with a good sense of smell can be trained to perform this task.
* Therapy dogs, with friendly and gentle temperaments, trained to provide comfort and affection
  to hospitalized and institutionalized patients.
* The war dog, used by the military to detect mines and enemy soldiers.

Show and sport (competition) dogs
=================================



        Main article: Show dog

        See also: Dog sport

Owners of dogs often enter them in competitions, whether show (breed conformation shows) or
sports, including dog racing & dog sledding. The winners garner much prestige and prize money.
These dogs are often bred specifically for competition, which may not be entirely beneficial for
the breeds due to the magnification of hereditary defects.

* Dog agility is a sport in which dogs complete a timed obstacle course.
* Dogsled racing is a winter sport where a team of dogs, usually Huskies or Malamutes, pull a
  sled and driver (called a musher). The Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race is perhaps the most famous
  of these races. Dog sledding is an ancient form of transportation and still a very effective way
  of moving freight across this type of terrain.
* Dog racing, almost always Greyhounds, involves dogs racing at betting tracks in a sport not
  unlike horseracing, reaching speeds of 40 miles per hour. Elsewhere, Dachshunds are often raced,
  as a humourous sidelight in charity events.
* Dog fighting and dog baiting are blood sports involving dogs. They are illegal in most
  jurisdictions, but are still occasionally performed underground.
* The show dog, purebreds entered in conformation dog shows and evaluated by how closely they
  match the ideal characteristics of the breed. The Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show is one of the
  most famous of this type of competition.

Diet
====


At present, there is some debate as to whether domestic dogs should be classified as omnivores or
carnivores, by diet. The classification in the Order Carnivora does not necessarily mean that a
dog's diet must be restricted to meat; unlike an obligate carnivore, such as the cat family with
its shorter small intestine, a dog is dependent on neither meat-specific protein nor a very high
level of protein in order to fulfill its basic dietary requirements. Dogs are able to healthily
digest a variety of foods including vegetables and grains, and in fact dogs can consume a large
proportion of these in their diet. Wild canines not only eat available plants to obtain essential
amino acids, but also obtain nutrients from vegetable matter from the stomach and intestinal
contents of their herbivorous prey, which they usually consume. Domestic dogs can survive
healthily on a reasonable and carefully designed vegetarian diet, particularly if eggs and milk
products are included. Some sources suggest that a dog fed on a strict vegetarian diet may develop
dilated cardiomyopathy since it lacks L-carnitine,[12] however, maintaining a balanced diet is
also a factor since L-carnitine is found naturally in many nuts, seeds, beans, vegetables, fruits
and whole grains. In the wild, dogs can survive on a vegetarian diet when animal prey is not
available. However it has been noted, both by observation of extremely stressful conditions such
as the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race and by scientific studies of similar conditions, that
high-protein (approximately 40%) diets including meat help prevent damage to muscle tissue. (This
research is also true for some other mammals.) This level of protein corresponds to the percentage
of protein found in the wild dog's diet when prey is abundant; higher levels of protein seem to
confer no added benefit.

Dogs frequently eat grass, which is a harmless activity. Explanations abound, but rationales such
as that it neutralizes acid, or that eating grass might make the dog vomit, so dogs eat grass to
remove unwanted substances from their stomachs, are at best educated guesses. Dogs do vomit more
readily than humans, as part of their typical feeding behavior of gulping down food then
regurgitating indigestible bones, fur, etc. This behavior is typical of pack feeding in the wild,
where the most important thing is to get as much of the kill as possible before others consume it
all. Individual domestic dogs, however, may be very "picky" eaters, in the absence of this
evolutionary pressure.

Dangerous substances
====================


Some foods commonly enjoyed by humans are dangerous to dogs, including chocolate (Theobromine
poisoning), onions, grapes and raisins,[13] some types of gum, certain sweeteners[14] and
Macadamia nuts. It is currently believed that the only dangerous substance in chocolate is cocoa,
meaning that forms of chocolate without this ingredient, such as white chocolate may become
re-evaluated for their safety in future.

The acute danger from grapes and raisins has been uncovered only since about 2000, and made public
slowly since then. At present the cause is not known. Whatever the reason, since only small
quantities are necessary to induce acute renal failure, dogs should not be fed grapes or raisins,
and sultanas and currants should likely be withheld as well.

Cooked bones should never be given to dogs, as the heat changes the chemical and physical
properties so that they cannot be chewed properly, splintering into jagged shards, and resist
digestion.

Human medications should not be given to a dog as a substitute for their regular medication as
some can be especially toxic, especially paracetamol/acetaminophen (Tylenol). Alcoholic beverages
pose much of the same hazards to dogs as they do to humans.

Dogs may also find some poisons attractive, including antifreeze, snail bait, insect bait, and
rodent poisons. Antifreeze may be one of the most insidious of poisons to dogs because of its
sweet taste and because a dog may walk upon or lie down upon a spill of it or its residue and then
lick it off. Dogs must be kept strictly away from antifreeze and not allowed access to any place
that has had a spill of it that has not been completely removed.

Plants such as caladium, dieffenbachia and philodendron will cause throat irritations that will
burn the throat going down as well as coming up. Hops are particularly dangerous and even small
quantities can lead to malignant hyperthermia.[15]

Amaryllis, daffodil, english ivy, iris, and tulip (especially the bulbs) cause gastric irritation
and sometimes central nervous system excitement followed by coma, and, in severe cases, even death.

Ingesting foxglove, lily of the valley, larkspur and oleander can be life threatening because the
cardiovascular system is affected. Equally life threatening is the yew which affects the nervous
system. If any of these plants are ingested, get the dog to a veterinarian immediately.

Many household cleaners such as ammonia, bleach, disinfectants, drain cleaner, soaps, detergents,
and other cleaners, mothballs and matches are dangerous to dogs, as are cosmetics such as
deodorants, hair coloring, nail polish and remover, home permanent lotion, and suntan lotion.

Zinc toxicity, mostly in the form of the ingestion of US pennies minted after 1982, is commonly
fatal in dogs where it causes a severe hemolytic anemia.[16]

Dogs will occasionally eat their own feces or the feces of other species if available, such as
that of cats and horses. This is known as coprophagia, and may be indicative of boredom or hunger,
although there is no definitive reason known. Owners of both cats and dogs may find that dogs
treat the catbox as a snack bar. Such behavior should be discouraged, as it could lead to
Toxoplasmosis.

Reproduction
============



        Main article: Canine reproduction

General
=======


In domestic dogs, sexual maturity (puberty) begins to happen around age 6 to 12 months for both
males and females, although this can be delayed until up to two years old for some large breeds.
Adolescence for most domestic dogs is around 12 to 15 months, beyond which they are for the most
part more adult than puppy. As with other domesticated species, domestication has selectively bred
for higher libido and earlier and more frequent breeding cycles in dogs, than in their wild
ancestors.

Males
=====



 This section is a stub. You can help by expanding it.

Females
=======


Females have a twice-yearly fertile period, known as 'seasons', during which her body prepares for
pregnancy, and at the peak she will come "into heat", her fertile period, during which time she
will be mentally and physically receptive to copulation. A female is able to become pregnant on
her first heat; this is not normally considered advisable as she is mentally and physically still
young in other ways.

As with most domesticated species, one of the first and strongest effects seen from selective
breeding is selection for cooperation with the breeding process as directed by humans. In domestic
dogs, one of the behaviors that is noted is the abolition of the pair bond seen in wild canines.
The ability of female domestic dog to come into estrus at any time of the year and usually twice a
year is also valued. The amount of time between cycles varies greatly among different dogs, but a
particular dog's cycle tends to be consistent through her life. This is also called in season or
in heat. Conversely, undomesticated canine species experience estrus once a year, typically in
late winter.

Most female dogs come into season for the first time between 6 and 12 months, although some larger
breeds delay until as late as 2 years. Like most mammals, the age that a bitch first comes into
season is mostly a function of her current body weight as a proportion of her body weight when
fully mature. The different rates of maturation are responsible for the menarche, not the
chronological age. They then experience fertile seasons biannually until old age. Female dogs do
not experience menopause, although their cycles will become irregular and fertility becomes
unpredictable as the become older. Dogs over around 7 or 8 years are usually considered no longer
appropriate for breeding, but can still remain fertile.

Copulation
==========


 This section does not cite its references or sources.
Please help improve this article by introducing appropriate citations. (help, get involved!)
Any unsourced material that has been or is likely to be challenged may be removed at any time.

You can also use {{More sources}} if multiple sections (but not the entire article) is missing
sources. This article has been tagged since January 2007.


When copulating, a male canine initially mounts the female from behind, as with most tetrapods, a
position known informally as doggy style. The female will hold her tail to the side and allow this
if receptive. If unreceptive she may sit or lie down, snap, move away, or otherwise be
uncooperative or not allow mating. The male will often move about as he tries to get a good
purchase upon her, and whilst attempting penetration of his penis to the female's vulva. At this
point, the penis is not erect, it is slender and held rigid by a small bone inside, known as the
baculum.

When the male achieves penetration, he will often hold tighter and thrust faster, and it is at
this point when he is mating that the male's penis expands. Canine reproduction is different from
human sexual intercourse, because human males become erect first, and then enter the female;
canine males enter first, then swell and become erect.

The male dog has a bulbus glandis, a spherical area of erectile tissue at the base of the penis,
which traps the penis inside the female's vagina during copulation as it becomes engorged with
blood. [1]

Once the penis is locked into the vagina by the bulbus glandis, the male will usually lift a leg
and swing it over the female's back while turning around. The two stand with their hind ends
touching and the penis locked inside the vagina while ejaculation occurs, decreasing leakage of
semen from the vagina. After some time, typically 5 - 20 minutes (but sometimes longer), the
bulbus glandis disengorges, allowing the mates to separate. Virgin dogs can become quite
distressed at finding themselves unable to separate during their first copulation, and may try to
pull away or run. Dog breeders' websites often suggest it is appropriate for those involved to
help calm and settle the mating dogs once this stage is reached, if they show anxiety, through
until eventual separation.

Note that similar canine mounting behavior (sometimes with pelvic thrusting) is also used by
dominant canines of both sexes. Dominance mounting, with or without thrusting, should not be
confused with copulatory mounting, in which the thrusting is short term until a "tie" is achieved.

Gestation and litters
=====================

A Catahoula Leopard mother nursing her litter of puppies.



Dogs bear their litters roughly 9 weeks after fertilization, although the length of gestation can
vary from 56 to 72 days. A general rule of thumb is that a mammal will produce half as many
offspring as the number of teats on the mother. This rule is altered in domesticated animals since
larger litters are often favored for economic reasons and in dogs, particularly, the great range
of sizes and shapes plays a role in how many healthy puppies a female can carry. An average litter
consists of about six puppies, though this number may vary widely based on the breed of dog. Toy
dogs generally produce from one to four puppies in each litter, while much larger breeds may
average as many as 12 pups in each litter. The number of puppies also varies with the mother's age
and health, the father's sperm count, the timing of the breeding, and many other factors.

Some breeds have been developed to emphasize certain physical traits beyond the point at which
they can safely bear litters on their own. For example, the Bulldog often requires artificial
insemination and almost always requires cesarean section for giving birth. Since a mother can
provide nutrients and care to only a limited number of offspring, humans must assist in the care
and feeding when the litter exceeds approximately eight puppies.

Spaying and neutering
=====================



        For more details on this topic, see Spaying and neutering.

Spaying (females only) and neutering (both genders but more usually males) refers to the
sterilization of animals, usually by removal of the male's testicles or the female's ovaries and
uterus, in order to eliminate the ability to procreate, and reduce sex drive. Neutering has also
been known to reduce aggression in male dogs, but can occasionally increase aggression in female
dogs.

Animal control agencies in the United States and the ASPCA advise that dogs not intended for
further breeding should be spayed or neutered so that they do not have undesired puppies. In the
less developed countries of Europe, spaying or neutering of dogs is less common, and owners are
usually instead advised to keep their dogs on leash and under supervision to avoid unwanted
matings; drugs are used to prevent pregnancy and abort unwanted litters.]

Because of the overpopulation of dogs in some countries, puppies born to strays or as the result
of accidental breedings often end up being killed in animal shelters. Spaying and neutering can
also decrease the risk of hormone-driven diseases such as mammary cancer, as well as undesired
hormone-driven behaviors. The hormonal changes involved with sterilization are likely to somewhat
change the animal's personality, however, and some object to spaying and neutering as the
sterilization could be carried out without the excision of organs.

Contrary to myth, it is not required for a female dog to either experience a heat cycle or have
puppies before spaying, and likewise, a male dog does not need the experience of mating before
neutering. Female dogs spayed before their first heat have a vastly lower incidence of mammary
tumors than dogs which are spayed after their first heat or pregnancy (1% verses 22%). A female
dog can become pregnant on her first heat cycle (which can take place as early as six months), and
should be kept away from intact male dogs, including littermates, over the age of 4 months].

Gender-preservative surgeries such as vasectomy and tubal ligation are possible, but do not appear
to be popular due to the continuation of gender-specific behaviors and disease risks.

Overpopulation
==============


According to the Humane Society of the United States, 3-4 million dogs and cats are euthanized
each year in the United States and many more are confined to cages in shelters because there are
many more animals than there are homes. Spaying or neutering dogs helps keep overpopulation
down.[17] Local humane societies, SPCA's and other animal protection organizations urge people to
spay or neuter their pets and to adopt animals from shelters instead of purchasing them. Several
notable public figures have spoken out against animal over population, including Bob Barker. On
his game show, The Price is Right, Barker stresses the issue at the end of every episode, saying:
"Help control the pet population. Have your pets spayed or neutered."

Dog health
==========



        Main article: Dog health

        Further information: Category:Dog health

Dogs are susceptible to various diseases, ailments, and poisons, some of which affect humans in
the same way, others of which are unique to dogs. Dogs, like all mammals, are also susceptible to
heat exhaustion when dealing with high levels of humidity and/or extreme temperatures.[18]

Diseases
========


Infectious diseases commonly associated with dogs include rabies (hydrophobia), canine parvovirus,
and canine distemper. Congenital diseases of dogs can include a wide range from hip dysplasia and
medial patellar luxation to epilepsy and pulmonic stenosis. Canines can get just about anything a
human can get (excluding many infections which are species specific) like hypothyroidism, cancer,
dental disease, heart disease, etc.

Two serious medical conditions affecting dogs are pyometra, affecting unspayed females of all
types and ages, and bloat, which affects the larger breeds or deep chested dogs. Both of these are
acute conditions, and can kill rapidly; owners of dogs which may be at risk should learn about
such conditions as part of good animal care.

Parasites
=========


Common external parasites are various species of fleas, ticks, and mites. Internal parasites
include hookworms, tapeworms, roundworms, and heartworms. See also CVBD (Canine Vector-Borne
Diseases).

Common physical disorders
=========================


Some breeds of dogs are also prone to certain genetic ailments, such as hip dysplasia, luxating
patellas, cleft palate, blindness, or deafness. Dogs are also susceptible to the same ailments
that humans are, including diabetes, epilepsy, cancer, and arthritis. Gastric torsion and bloat is
a dangerous problem in some large-chested breeds.

Lifespan and old age
====================



        Main articles: Dog years and Aging in dogs

The typical lifespan of dogs varies considerably by breed. For example, many giant dog breeds
(such as Great Danes) average only 7 or 8 years, while some small terrier breeds, or toy breeds
might live as long as 20 or above. The average lifespan for mixed-breed and midsize dogs is about
13 to 14 years. The longest-lived dog with reliable documentation died at 29 years and 27 days,
the breed of the dog was an Australian cattle dog and it lived in Virginia, USA, the date of death
was in 1939. The oldest currently living dog is from Canberra, Australia and is now 27 years old.
Although the lifespans of all living species are mostly uncontrollable, one can significantly
extend a dog's life by feeding it the right kinds of foods, giving it regular exercise, treating
its diseases, caring for its special needs and giving it love and comfort.

Behavior
========


        Further information:

Dogs are very social animals, but their personality and behavior vary with breed as well as how
they are treated by their owners and others who come in contact with them. Physical abuse and
starvation can produce very neurotic, dangerous dogs, and even simply failing to socialize them
properly may entail maladaptive behaviors.] It is not uncommon for dogs to attack humans and other
animals; however, this is usually because of lack of care or improper upbringing by its owner.

Laughter in dogs
================


Laughter might not be confined or unique to humans, despite Aristotle's observation that "only the
human animal laughs". The differences between chimpanzee and human laughter may be the result of
adaptations that have evolved to enable human speech. However, some behavioral psychologists argue
that self-awareness of one's situation, or the ability to identify with somebody else's
predicament, are prerequisites for laughter, so animals are not really laughing in the same way
that humans do.

A playful dog



The dog-laugh sounds similar to a normal pant. However by analyzing the pant using a spectrograph,
this pant varies with bursts of frequencies, resulting in a laugh. When this recorded dog-laugh
vocalization is played to dogs in a shelter setting, it can initiate play, promote pro-social
behavior, and decrease stress levels. In a study by Simonet, Versteeg, and Storie, one hundred and
twenty subject dogs residing in a mid-size county animal shelter were observed. Dogs ranging from
4 months to 10 years of age were compared with and without exposure to a dog-laugh recording. The
stress behaviors measured included panting, growling, salivating, pacing, barking, cowering,
lunging, play-bows, sitting, orienting and lying down. The study resulted in positive findings.
Exposure to the dog laughing recording resulted in the following: significantly reduced stress
behaviors, increased tail wagging and the display of a play-face when playing was initiated, and
more frequent pro-social behavior such as approaching and lip licking. This research suggests
exposure to dog-laugh vocalizations can calm and possibly increase shelter adoptions. (Simonet,
Versteeg, &amp; Storie 2005) A dog laughter sample: Simonet 2005.

Dog communication
=================



        Main article: Dog communication

Ancestry and history of domestication
=====================================

It has been suggested that this article or section be merged into Origin of the domestic dog.
(Discuss)


        Main article: Origin of the domestic dog

This ancient mosaic, likely Roman, shows a large dog with a collar hunting a lion.



Molecular systematics indicate that the domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris) descends from one or
more populations of wild wolves (Canis lupus). As reflected in the nomenclature, dogs are
descended from the wolf and are able to interbreed with wolves.

The relationship between human and canine has deep roots. Wolf remains have been found in
association with hominid remains dating from 400,000 years ago. Converging archaeological and
genetic evidence indicate a time of domestication in the late Upper Paleolithic close to the
Pleistocene/Holocene boundary, between 17,000 and 14,000 years ago. Fossil bone morphologies and
genetic analysis of current and ancient dog and wolf populations have not yet been able to
conclusively determine whether all dogs descend from a single domestication event, or whether dogs
were domesticated independently in more than one location. Domesticated dogs may have interbred
with local populations of wild wolves on several occasions (so-called introgression).

The earliest dog fossils, two crania from Russia and a mandible from Germany, date from 13,000 to
17,000 years ago. Their likely ancestor is the large northern Holarctic wolf, Canis lupus lupus.
Remains of smaller dogs from Mesolithic (Natufian) cave deposits in the Middle East, dated to
around 12,000 years ago, have been interpreted as descendants of a lighter Southwest Asian wolf,
Canis lupus arabs. Rock art and skeletal remains indicate that by 14,000 years ago, dogs were
present from North Africa across Eurasia to North America. Dog burials at the Mesolithic cemetery
of Svaerdborg in Denmark suggest that in ancient Europe dogs were valued companions.

Genetic analyses have so far yielded divergent results. VilÃ , Savolainen, and colleagues (1997)
concluded that dogs split off from wolves between 75,000 and 135,000 years ago, while a subsequent
analysis by Savolainen et al. (2002) indicated a "common origin from a single gene pool for all
dog populations" between 40,000 and 15,000 years ago in East Asia. Verginelli et al. (2005),
however, suggest both sets of dates must be reevaluated in light of recent findings showing that
poorly calibrated molecular clocks have systematically overestimated the age of geologically
recent events. On balance, and in agreement with the archaeological evidence, 15,000 years ago is
the most likely time for the wolf-dog divergence.

Verginelli examined ancient DNA evidence from five prehistoric Italian canids carbon-dated to
between 15,000 and 3,000 years old, 341 wolves from several populations worldwide, and 547
purebred dogs. Their results indicate multiple independent origins of dogs and/or of frequent
interbreeding between early proto-dogs and wolves throughout a vast geographic range. The detailed
history remains unexplored and until further evidence is available, the following section on wolf
ancestors must be considered purely speculative.

Wolf ancestors
==============


Although all wolves belong to the species Canis lupus, there are (or were) many subspecies that
had developed a distinctive appearance, social structure, and other traits. For example, the
Japanese Wolf and the Eastern Timber Wolf possess different distinctive coloration, hunting and
social structures. The origin of the dog is so ancient and so worldwide that many varieties of
wolf played a part in it. It is wrong to say that dogs descended from modern wolves. They
descended from ancestral wolves, and this difference must always be kept in mind. Ancestral wolves
of many varieties existed all over the world. Humans are of a tropical origin, and it was there
that the domestication of dogs from wolves first took place]. It follows then, that the first
wolves to be domesticated were the warm-climate, short-haired varieties that gave rise to many of
our dog breeds, with the long-haired, northern wolves giving rise to our northern breeds when
humans reached these latitudes.]

The Indian Wolf is thought to have contributed to the development of more breeds of dogs than
other subspecies. Many of today's wild dogs, such as the dingo and the pariah dogs, are descended
from this wolf. The Indian Wolf is also thought to have bred with descendants of the European wolf
to create the Mastiffs and eventually leading to the development of such diverse breeds as the
Pug, the Saint Bernard, and the Bloodhound. The Tibetan Mastiff is an example of an ancient breed.

The European wolf, in turn, may have contributed many of its attributes to the Spitz dog types,
most terriers, and many of today's sheepdogs. The Chinese wolf is probably ancestor to the
Pekingese and toy spaniels, although it is also probable that descendants of the Chinese and
European wolves encountered each other over the millennia, contributing to many of the oriental
toy breeds.

The Eastern Timber Wolf is a direct ancestor to most, if not all, of the North American northern
sled dog types. This interbreeding still occurs with dogs living in the Arctic region, where the
attributes of the wolf that enable survival in a hostile environment are valued by humans.
Additionally, unintentional crossbreeding occurs simply because dogs and wolves live in the same
environment. The general reproductive isolation which is required to define dogs and wolves as
separate species is purely a result of lack of opportunity, stemming from a general mutual
unfamiliarity, suspicion, mistrust, and fear.

The phenotypic characteristics that distinguish a wolf from a dog are tenuous. Wolves typically
have a "brush tail" and erect ears. While some dog breeds possess one of these characteristics,
they rarely possess both.

Speed of domestication
======================


Current research indicates that domestication, or the attributes of a domesticated animal, can
occur much more quickly,[19] [not in citation given] than previously believed. Domestication of a
wild dog may occur within one or two human generations with deliberate selective breeding. It is
also now generally believed that initial domestication was through mutual desire. Wild canines who
scavenged around human habitations received more food than their more skittish or fearful
counterparts. Canines who attacked people or their children were likely killed or driven away,
while those more friendly animals survived. Canines would have been beneficial by chasing away
other vermin or scavengers. With their sharp senses, they would also be valuable as an alarm
against marauding predators. The relationship is theorized to have developed in this way.

A 2007 Animal Planet documentary discussed a 1900-1920 domestication experiment in Russia that led
to rapid unusual changes in the coats of foxes.

Dog meat for human consumption
==============================



        Main article: Dog meat

In some countries, certain dog breeds, apart from being kept as pets, are raised on farms and
slaughtered for consumption. In countries where dogs are particularly popular as household pets,
consumption of dogs is generally taboo and considered an abhorrent cultural practice, but there
are exceptions, such as Vietnam, where dogs are popular as both pets and meat.[20]

Although the Chinese were the first to domesticate the dog and keep them as pets, dog meat has
been a source of food in China from at least the time of Confucius, and possibly even before.
Ancient writings from the Zhou Dynasty referred to the 'three beasts' (which were bred for food),
including pig, goat, and dog. Mencius, the philosopher, recommended dog as the tastiest of all
meats.

In most other countries such as countries in the Western world, eating dog meat is strongly
frowned upon, as it is with cats.

Dog abuse
=========



        Main article: Cruelty to animals

Cruelty to dogs refers to treatment that causes unacceptable suffering or harm. What qualifies as
unacceptable suffering varies among countries and cultures. Cruelty can be passive, typified by
simple neglect, or active, with malicious intent.[21]

Signs of dog abuse
==================


Signs of dog abuse include:

* Unusually frightened, fearful or subdued
* Fractures
* Bruising
* Eye injuries
* Scalds and burns
* Signs of malnutrition
* Significant matting or other poor grooming indicators
* Ignored health problems
* Injury history incompatible with injury or owner refusing to comment on how injury occurred
* Owner showing lack of concern for animalâ€™s injuries
* Owner exhibiting Munchausenâ€™s Syndrome by Proxy (MSP)

Famous dogs & dog sayings
=========================



        Main article: List of famous dogs

In the long shared history of dogs and humans, there have been many famous, and notorious, dogs,
and many fictional dogs have been featured in literature, cinema, and other media.

"I've seen a look in dogs' eyes, a quickly vanishing look of amazed contempt, and I am convinced
that basically dogs think humans are nuts." - John Steinbeck[22]

"When a dog wags her tail and barks at the same time, how do you know which end to believe?" -
Robin Williams in "Man of the Year"

Dog breeds
==========

A Jack Russell Terrier playing with his toy.

The dog has developed into hundreds of breeds with a great degree of variation, such as this
Miniature Pinscher and Boxer.



There are numerous dog breeds, with over 800 being recognized by various kennel clubs worldwide.
As all dog breeds have been derived from mixed-breed dog populations, the term "purebred" has
meaning only with respect to a certain number of generations. Many dogs, especially outside the
United States of America and Western Europe, belong to no recognized breed.

The Papillon breed is highly athletic breed of dog



A few basic breed types have evolved gradually during the domesticated dog's relationship with man
over the last 10,000 or more years, but most modern breeds are of relatively recent derivation.
Many of these are the product of a deliberate process of artificial selection. Because of this,
some breeds are highly specialized, and there is extraordinary morphological diversity across
different breeds. Despite these differences, dogs are able to distinguish dogs from other kinds of
animal.

The definition of a dog breed is a matter of some controversy. Depending on the size of the
original founding population, closed gene pool breeds can have problems with inbreeding,
specifically due to founder effect. Dog breeders are increasingly aware of the importance of
population genetics and of maintaining diverse gene pools. Health testing and new DNA tests can
help avoid problems, by providing a replacement for natural selection. Without selection,
inbreeding and closed gene pools can increase the risk of severe health or behavioral problems.
Some organizations define a breed more loosely, such that an individual may be considered of one
breed as long as 75% of its parentage is of that breed. These considerations affect both pets and
the show dogs entered in dog shows. Even prize-winning purebred dogs sometimes possess crippling
genetic defects due to founder effect or inbreeding.[23] These problems are not limited to
purebred dogs and can affect mixed-breed populations.[24] The behavior and appearance of a dog of
a particular breed can be predicted fairly accurately, while mixed-breed dogs show a broader range
of innovative appearance and behavior.

A 10-year-old Staffordshire Bull Terrier/Labrador.



In February 2004, the Canine Studies Institute in Aurora, Ohio, arranged recognized breeds of dogs
into ten categories.

Mixed-breed dogs or Mongrels are dogs that do not belong to specific breeds, being mixtures of two
or more in variant percentages. Mixed breeds, or dogs with no purebred ancestry, are not
inherently "better" or "worse" than purebred dogs as companions, pets, working dogs, or
competitors in dog sports. Sometimes mixed-breed dogs are deliberately bred, for example, the
Cockapoo, a mixture of Cocker Spaniel and Miniature Poodle. Such deliberate crosses may display
hybrid vigor and other desirable traits, but can also lack one or more of the desired traits of
their parents, such as temperament or a particular color or coat. However, without genetic testing
of the parents, the crosses can sometimes end up inheriting genetic defects that occur in both
parental breeds. Deliberately crossing two or more breeds is also a manner of establishing new
breeds.

Neoteny in the rapid evolution of diverse dog breeds
====================================================

It has been suggested that this article or section be merged into Origin of the domestic dog.
(Discuss)

This rapid evolution of dogs from wolves is an example of neoteny or paedomorphism. As with many
species, the young wolves are more social and less dominant than adults; therefore, the selection
for these characteristics, whether deliberate or inadvertent, is more likely to result in a simple
retention of juvenile characteristics into adulthood than to generate a complex of independent new
changes in behavior. (This is true of many domesticated animals, including humans themselves, who
have many characteristics similar to young bonobos.) This paedomorphic selection naturally results
in a retention of juvenile physical characteristics as well. Compared to wolves, many adult dog
breeds retain such juvenile characteristics as soft fuzzy fur, round torsos, large heads and eyes,
ears that hang down rather than stand erect, etc.; characteristics which are shared by most
juvenile mammals, and therefore generally elicit some degree of protective and nurturing behavior
cross-species from most adult mammals, including humans, who term such characteristics "cute" or
"appealing".

The example of canine neoteny goes even further, in that the various breeds are differently
neotenized according to the type of behavior that was selected.Stephen Jay Gould; Eight Little
Piggies: Reflections in Natural History; W. W. Norton &amp; Company, 1993; pp. 394

* Livestock guardian dogs exhibit the controlled characteristics of hunting dogs. Members of
  this group, such as Border Collies, Belgian Malinois and German Shepherds use tactics of hunter
  and prey to intimidate and keep control of herds and flocks. Their natural instinct to bring
  down an animal under their charge is muted by training. Other members of the group, including
  Welsh Corgis, Canaan dogs, and Cattle dogs herd with a more aggressive demeanor and make use of
  body design to elude the defences of their charges.
* Gun dog breeds used in huntingâ€”that is, pointers, setters, spaniels, and retrieversâ€”have
  an intermediate degree of paedomorphism; they are at the point where they share in the pack's
  hunting behavior, but are still in a junior role, not participating in the actual attack. They
  identify potential prey and freeze into immobility, for instance, but refrain from then stalking
  the prey as an adult predator would do next; this results in the "pointing" behavior for which
  such dogs are bred. Similarly, they seize dead or wounded prey and bring it back to the "pack",
  even though they did not attack it themselves, that is, "retrieving" behavior. Their physical
  characteristics are closer to that of the mature wild canine than the sheepdog breeds, but they
  typically do not have erect ears, etc.
* Scenthounds maintain an intermediate body type and behavior pattern that causes them to
  actually pursue prey by tracking their scent, but tend to refrain from actual individual attacks
  in favor of vocally summoning the pack leaders (in this case, humans) to do the job. They often
  have a characteristic vocalization called a bay. Some examples are the Beagle, Bloodhound,
  Basset Hound, Coonhound, Dachshund, Fox Hound, Otter Hound, and Harrier.
* Sighthounds, who pursue and attack perceived prey on sight, maintain the mature canine size
  and some features, such as narrow chest and lean bodies, but have largely lost the erect ears of
  the wolf and thick double layered coats. Some examples are the Afghan, Borzoi, Saluki, Sloughi,
  Pharaoh Hound, Azawakh, Whippet, and Greyhound.
* Mastiff-types are large dogs, both tall and massive with barrel-like chests, large bones, and
  thick skulls. They have traditionally been bred for war, protection, and guardian work.
* Bulldog-types are medium sized dogs bred for combat against both wild and domesticated
  animals. These dogs have a massive, square skull and large bones with an extremely muscular
  build and broad shoulders.
* Terriers similarly have adult aggressive behavior, famously coupled with a lack of juvenile
  submission, and display correspondingly adult physical features such as erect ears, although
  many breeds have also been selected for size and sometimes dwarfed legs to enable them to pursue
  prey in their burrows.

The least paedomorphic behavior pattern may be that of the basenji, bred in Africa to hunt
alongside humans almost on a peer basis; this breed is often described as highly independent,
neither needing nor appreciating a great deal of human attention or nurturing, often described as
"catlike" in its behavior. It too has the body plan of an adult canine predator. Of course, dogs
in general possess a significant ability to modify their behavior according to experience,
including adapting to the behavior of their "pack leaders"â€”again, humans. This allows them to be
trained to behave in a way that is not specifically the most natural to their breed; nevertheless,
the accumulated experience of thousands of years shows that some combinations of nature and
nurture are quite daunting, for instance, training whippets to guard flocks of sheep.

Breed popularity
================


Breed popularity varies widely over time[25] and in different parts of the world and different
segments of the population. Counting by American Kennel Club (AKC) registration (not by licensing
registration or by United Kennel Club (UKC) registration, which could present different
statistics), the Labrador Retriever has been the United States's most commonly registered breed of
dog since 1991. [26] However, even within parts of the United States, popularity varies; for
example, in 2005 the most-registered breed in New York City was the Poodle while the Yorkshire
Terrier was the second-most-registered breed in Houston. [27] However, animal shelters in many
parts of the United States report that the most-commonly available dog for adoption is the
American Pit Bull Terrier or pit bull-type mixes, making up as much as 20% of dogs available for
adoption, none of which would be registered with the AKC.[28] Two decades ago, in 1983, the AKC's
top two registered breeds were the American Cocker Spaniel and the Poodle.[29]

In Britain, The Kennel Club reports that the most-registered breed from at least 1999 to 2005 was
the Labrador Retriever. It rounds out the top three for 1999 to 2005 with the German Shepherd Dog,
also popular in the States, and the English Cocker Spaniel[30] , which is no longer even in the
top ten in the States.

See also
========


* Origin of the domestic dog
* Ability to swim
* Attack dog
* Bark (dog)
* Dog attack
* Dog communication
* Dog licence
* Dog odor
* Fear of dogs
* List of dog breeds
* Puppy
* The Dog king
* Therapy Dog
* Guard dog
* War Dog

