Elephant
========

Elephant

An African Elephant near the border of the Serengeti and Ngorongoro Conservation Area in Tanzania.



Kingdom: Animalia

Phylum: Chordata

Subphylum: Vertebrata

Class: Mammalia

Order: Proboscidea

Superfamily: Elephantoidea

Family: Elephantidae
Gray, 1821


Subfamilia


* See Hierarchy Classification


The elephants (Elephantidae) are a family of pachyderm, and the only remaining family in the order
Proboscidea in the class Mammalia. Elephantidae has three living species: the African Bush
Elephant, the African Forest Elephant (until recently known collectively as the African Elephant),
and the Asian Elephant (also known as the Indian Elephant). Other species have become extinct
since the last ice age, which ended about 10,000 years ago, the Mammoth being the most famous of
these.

Elephants are mammals, and the largest land animals alive today. The elephant's gestation period
is 22 months, the longest of any land animal. At birth it is common for an elephant calf to weigh
120 kg (265 lb). An elephant may live as long as 70 years, sometimes longer. The largest elephant
ever recorded was shot in Angola in 1956. It was male and weighed about 12,000 kg (26,400 lb),[1]
with a shoulder height of 4.2m (13.8 ft), a meter (3 ft 4 in) taller than the average male African
elephant.[2] The smallest elephants, about the size of a calf or a large pig, were a prehistoric
variant that lived on the island of Crete until 5000 BC, possibly 3000 BC.

Elephants are symbols of wisdom in Asian cultures, and are famed for their exceptional memory and
high intelligence, rivalled only by cetaceans and hominids.

Elephants are increasingly threatened by human intrusion. Between 1970 and 1989, the African
elephant population plunged from 1.3 million to about 600,000 in 1989; the current population is
estimated to be between 400,000 and 660,000.[3] The elephant is now a protected species worldwide,
with restrictions in place on capture, domestic use, and trade in products such as ivory.
Elephants generally have no natural predators, although a pride of 32 specialized lions in Savuti,
Chobe National Park, prey on elephants at night. [1],[2]

The word came via Latin from Greek á¼?Î»Î­Ï†Î±Ï‚ (stem á¼?Î»ÎµÏ†Î±Î½Ï„-) = "ivory", "elephant".

Contents
========



* Zoology
  o Varieties
    - African Elephant
    - Asian Elephant

  o Body characteristics
    - Trunk
    - Tusks
    - Teeth
    - Skin
    - Legs and feet
    - Ears

  o Evolution
  o Diet

* Intelligence
  o Senses
  o Social behaviour
  o Self-awareness
  o Homosexuality
  o Communication

* Reproduction, calves, and calf rearing
  o Reproduction
  o Motherhood and calf rearing
  o Elephant calves
  o Allomothers

* Effect on the environment
* Threat of extinction
  o Hunting
  o Dehabitation
  o Controversy
  o National parks

* Humanity and elephants
  o Harvest from the wild
  o Domestication and use
  o Elephant traps
  o Elephants in culture
    - Pop culture
    - Religion and philosophy
    - Politics and secular symbolism

  o Elephant rage
    - Musth
    - Other causes


* Rogue elephant
* Natural predators
* Classification of the family Elephantidae
* See also
* References
* External links

Zoology
=======

Comparative view of the human and elephant frames, c1860.

Varieties
=========


It has long been known that the African and Asian elephants are separate species. African
elephants, at up to 4 m (13'1")tall and weighing 7500 kg, (8.27 tons) are usually larger than the
Asian species and they have bigger ears. Both male and female African elephants have long tusks,
while their Asian counterparts have shorter ones, with those of females vanishingly small. African
elephants have a dipped back, smooth forehead and two "fingers" at the tip of their trunks,
whereas the Asian have an arched back, two humps on the forehead and only one "finger" at the tip
of their trunks.

African elephants are further subdivided into two populations, the Savanna and Forest, and recent
genetic studies have led to a reclassification of these as separate species, the forest population
now being called Loxodonta cyclotis, and the Savanna (or Bush) population termed Loxodonta
africana. This reclassification has important implications for conservation, because it means that
where previously it was assumed that a single and endangered species comprised two small
populations, if in reality these are two separate species, then as a consequence, both could be
more gravely endangered than a more numerous and wide-ranging single species might have been.
There is also a potential danger in that if the forest elephant is not explicitly listed as an
endangered species, poachers and smugglers might thereby be better able to evade the law
forbidding trade in endangered animals and their body parts.

The Forest elephant and the Savanna elephant can hybridise - that is, breed together -
successfully, though their preferences for different terrains reduce such opportunities. As the
African elephant has only recently been recognized to comprise two separate species, groups of
captive elephants have not been comprehensively classified and some could well be hybrids.

Successful hybridisation between African and Asian Elephant species is much more unlikely, as is
animal hybridization across different genera in general. In 1978, however, at Chester Zoo, an
Asian elephant cow gave birth to a hybrid calf sired by an African elephant bull (the old terms
are used here as these events pre-date the current classifications). "Motty", the resulting hybrid
male calf, had an African elephant's cheeks, their ears (large with pointed lobes) and legs
(longer and slimmer), but the toenail numbers, (5 for each front foot, 4 hind) and the single
trunk finger of an Asian elephant. His wrinkled trunk was like that of an African elephant. His
forehead was sloping with one dome and two smaller domes behind it. The body was African in type,
but had an Asian-type centre hump and an African-type rear hump. The calf died of infection 12
days later. It is preserved as a mounted specimen at the British Natural History Museum, London.
There are unconfirmed rumours of three other hybrid elephants born in zoos or circuses; all are
said to have been deformed and none survived.

African Elephant
================



        Main articles: African Bush Elephant and African Forest Elephant

Female African Elephant with calf, in Kenya.

African Bush (Savanna) Elephant in Mikumi National Park, Tanzania.



The mammals of the genus Loxodonta, often known collectively as African elephants, are currently
found in 37 countries in sub-Saharan Africa.

African elephants are distinguished from Asian elephants in several ways, the most noticeable
being their ears. Africans' ears are much larger and are shaped - some note - like the continent
of their origin. The African is typically larger than the Asian and has a concave back. Both
African males and females have external tusks and are usually less hairy than their Asian cousins.

African elephants have traditionally been classified as a single species comprising two distinct
subspecies, namely the savanna elephant (Loxodonta africana africana) and the forest elephant
(Loxodonta africana cyclotis), but recent DNA analysis suggests that these may actually constitute
distinct species.[4] While this split is not universally accepted by experts[5] a third species of
African elephant has also been proposed.[6]

Under the new two species classification, Loxodonta africana refers specifically to the Savanna
Elephant, the largest of all elephants. In fact, it is the largest land animal in the world,
standing up to 4 m (13 ft) at the shoulder and weighing approximately 7,000 kg (7.7 tons). The
average male stands about 3 m (10 ft) tall at the shoulder and weighs about 5500â€?000 kg (6.1 -
6.6 tons), the female being much smaller. Most often, Savanna Elephants are found in open
grasslands, marshes, and lakeshores. They range over much of the savanna zone south of the Sahara.

The other postulated species is the Forest Elephant (Loxodonta cyclotis). Compared with the
Savanna Elephant, its ears are usually smaller and rounder, and its tusks thinner and straighter
and not directed outwards as much. The Forest Elephant can weigh up to 10,000 lb 4,500 kg (10,000
lb) and stand about 10 ft (3 m) tall. Much less is known about these animals than their savanna
cousins because environmental and political obstacles make them very difficult to study. Normally,
they inhabit the dense African rain forests of central and western Africa, though occasionally
they roam the edges of forests and so overlap the territories of the Savanna elephants and breed
with them. In 1979, Iain Douglas-Hamilton estimated the continental population of African
elephants at around 1.3 million animals.[7] Although the estimate was controversial due to the
large dose of guesswork it contained,[8] it is very widely cited and has become a de facto
baseline that continues to be incorrectly used to quantify downward population trends in the
species. Through the 1980s, Loxodonta received worldwide attention due to the dwindling numbers of
major populations in East Africa, largely as a result of poaching. Today, according to IUCNâ€™s
African Elephant Status Report 2002[9] there are approximately between 400,000 and 650,000 African
elephants in the wild. Although this estimate only covers about half of the total elephant range,
experts do not believe the true figure to be much higher, as it is unlikely that large populations
remain to be discovered.[10] By far the largest populations are now found in Southern and Eastern
Africa, which together account for the majority of the continental population. According to a
recent analysis by IUCN experts, most major populations in Eastern and Southern Africa are stable
or have been steadily increasing since the mid-1990s, at an average rate of 4.5% per annum.[11]

Elephant populations in West Africa, on the other hand, are generally small and fragmented, and
only account for a small proportion of the continental total.[12] Much uncertainty remains as to
the size of the elephant population in Central Africa, where the prevalence of forest makes
population surveys logistically difficult, but poaching for ivory and bushmeat is believed to be
intense through much of the region[13]

Asian Elephant
==============



        Main article: Asian Elephant

An Asian elephant swimming.



Today, scientists estimate the world population of Asian elephants - also called Indian Elephants
or Elephas maximus - to be around 60,000, about one-tenth of the number of African elephants. More
precisely, it is estimated that there are between 38,000 and 53,000 wild elephants and between
14,500 and 15,300 domesticated elephants in Asia with perhaps another 1,000 scattered around zoos
in the rest of the world [3]. Perhaps the Asian elephants' decline has been less noticeable
because it has been more gradual. The causes of this decline are much the same as those of the
African - poaching and human encroachment.

Elephant In Sri Lanka



As with the Loxodonta, there are distinct subspecies of Elephas maximus. In general, the Asian
elephant is smaller than the African. It has smaller ears, shaped like the subcontinent of India,
and typically, only the males have large external tusks. An Asian elephant can also be
distinguished by the large areas of skin depigmentation.

The first subspecies is the Sri Lankan Elephant (Elephas maximus maximus). Found only on the
island of Sri Lanka, a small country off the southeast coast of India, it is the largest of the
Asians. There are only an estimated 3,000-4,500 members of this subspecies left today in the wild,
although no accurate census has been carried out in the recent past. Large males can weigh upward
to 5,400 kgs (12,000 lb) and stand over 3.4 m (11 ft) tall. Sri Lankan males have very large
cranial bulges, and both sexes have more areas of depigmentation than are found in the other
Asians. Typically, their ears, face, trunk, and belly have large concentrations of pink-speckled
skin. There is an Orphanage for elephants in Pinnawala Sri Lanka, which gives shelter to disabled,
injured elephants. This program plays a large role in protecting the Sri Lankan Elephant from
extinction.

Another subspecies, the Indian Elephant (Elephas maximus indicus) makes up the bulk of the Asian
elephant population. Numbering approximately 36,000, these elephants are lighter gray in colour,
with depigmentation only on the ears and trunk. Large males will ordinarily weigh only about 5,000
kgs (11,000 lb) but are as tall as the Sri Lankan. The mainland Asian can be found in 11 Asian
countries, from India to Indonesia. They prefer forested areas and transitional zones, between
forests and grasslands, where greater food variety is available.

The smallest of all the elephants is the Sumatran Elephant (Elephas maximus sumatranus).
Population estimates for this group range from 2,100 to 3,000 individuals. It is very light gray
and has less depigmentation than the other Asians, with pink spots only on the ears. Mature
Sumatrans will usually only measure 1.7-2.6m at the shoulder and weigh less than 3,000 kg (6,600
lb). An enormous animal nonetheless, it is considerably smaller than its other Asian (and African)
cousins and exists only on the island of Sumatra, usually in forested regions and partially wooded
habitats.

In 2003 a further subspecies was identified on Borneo. Named the Borneo pygmy elephant, it is
smaller and tamer than other Asian elephants. It also has relatively larger ears, longer tail and
straighter tusks.

Body characteristics
====================

Trunk
=====

An elephant can use its trunk for a variety of purposes. This one is wiping its eye.



The proboscis, or trunk, is a fusion of the nose and upper lip, elongated and specialized to
become the elephant's most important and versatile appendage. African elephants are equipped with
two fingerlike projections at the tip of their trunk, while Asians have only one. According to
biologists, the elephant's trunk may have over forty thousand individual muscles in it[4], making
it sensitive enough to pick up a single blade of grass, yet strong enough to rip the branches off
a tree. Some sources indicate that the correct number of muscles in an elephant's trunk is closer
to one hundred thousand. [5]

Most herbivores (plant eaters, like the elephant) possess teeth adapted for cutting and tearing
off plant materials. However, except for the very young or infirm, elephants always use their
trunks to tear up their food and then place it in their mouth. They will graze on grass or reach
up into trees to grasp leaves, fruit, or entire branches. If the desired food item is too high up,
the elephant will wrap its trunk around the tree or branch and shake its food loose or sometimes
simply knock the tree down altogether. The trunk is also used for drinking. Elephants suck water
up into the trunk (up to fifteen quarts [fourteen litres] at a time) and then blow it into their
mouth. Elephants also inhale water to spray on their body during bathing. On top of this watery
coating, the animal will then spray dirt and mud, which act as a protective sunscreen. When
swimming, the trunk makes an excellent snorkelling device.

This appendage also plays a key role in many social interactions. Familiar elephants will greet
each other by entwining their trunks, much like a handshake. They also use them while
play-wrestling, caressing during courtship and mother / child interactions, and for dominance
displays - a raised trunk can be a warning or threat, while a lowered trunk can be a sign of
submission. Elephants can defend themselves very well by flailing their trunk at unwanted
intruders or by grasping and flinging them.

An elephant also relies on its trunk for its highly developed sense of smell. Raising the trunk up
in the air and swivelling it from side to side, like a periscope, it can determine the location of
friends, enemies, and food sources.

Tusks
=====


The tusks of an elephant are its second upper incisors. Tusks grow continuously; an adult male's
tusks will grow about seven inches a year. Tusks are used to dig for water, salt, and roots; to
debark trees, to eat the bark; to dig into baobab trees to get at the pulp inside; and to move
trees and branches when clearing a path. In addition, they are used for marking trees to establish
territory and occasionally as weapons.

Like humans who are typically right- or left-handed, elephants are usually right- or left-tusked.
The dominant tusk, called the master tusk, is generally shorter and more rounded at the tip from
wear. Both male and female African elephants have large tusks that can reach over 10 ft (3 m) in
length and weigh over 200 lb (90 kg). In the Asian species, only the males have large tusks.
Female Asians have tusks which are very small or absent altogether. Asian males can have tusks as
long as the much larger Africans, but they are usually much slimmer and lighter; the heaviest
recorded is 86 lb (39 kg). The tusk of both species is mostly made of calcium phosphate in the
form of apatite. As a piece of living tissue, it is relatively soft (compared with other minerals
such as rock), and the tusk, also known as ivory, is strongly favoured by artisans for its
carvability. The desire for elephant ivory has been one of the major factors in the dramatic
decline of the world's elephant population.

Some extinct relatives of elephants had tusks in their lower jaws also (e.g. Tetrabelodon), or
instead (e.g. Dinotherium).

Teeth
=====


Elephants' teeth are very different from those of most other mammals. Over their lives they
usually have 28 teeth. These are:

* The two upper second incisors: these are the tusks.
* The milk precursors of the tusks.
* 12 premolars, 3 in each side of each jaw.
* 12 molars, 3 in each side of each jaw.

Replica of an Asian Elephant's molar, showing upper side



Unlike most mammals, which grow baby teeth and then replace them with a permanent set of adult
teeth, elephants have cycles of tooth rotation throughout their entire life. After one year the
tusks are permanent, but the other teeth are replaced five times in an elephant's life.] The teeth
do not emerge from the jaws vertically like with human teeth. Instead, they have a horizontal
progression, like a conveyor belt. New teeth grow in at the back of the mouth, pushing older teeth
toward the front, where they wear down with use and the remains fall out. When an elephant becomes
very old, the last set of teeth is worn to stumps, and it must rely on softer foods to chew. Very
elderly elephants often spend their last years exclusively in marshy areas where they can feed on
soft wet grasses. Eventually, when the last teeth fall out, the elephant will be unable to eat and
will die of starvation. Were it not for tooth wearout, their metabolism would allow them to live
much longer. Rupert Sheldrake has proposed this as an explanation for the elephant graveyards.
However, as more habitat is destroyed, the elephants' living space becomes smaller and smaller;
the elderly no longer have the opportunity to roam in search of more appropriate food and will,
consequently, die of starvation at an earlier age.

Tusks in the lower jaw are also second incisors. These grew out large in Dinotherium and some
mastodons, but in modern elephants they disappear early without erupting.

Skin
====

Skin of an African elephant



Elephants are called pachyderms, which means thick-skinned animals. An elephant's skin is
extremely tough around most parts of its body and measures about 2.5 cm (1 in) thick. However, the
skin around the mouth and inside of the ear is paper thin. Normally, the skin of an Asian is
covered with more hair than its African counterpart. This is most noticeable in the young. Asian
calves are usually covered with a thick coat of brownish red fuzz. As they get older, this hair
darkens and becomes more sparse, but it will always remain on their heads and tails.

The species of elephants are typically grayish in colour, but the Africans very often appear brown
or reddish from wallowing in mud holes of coloured soil. Wallowing is actually a very important
behaviour in elephant society. Not only is it important for socialization, but the mud acts as a
sunscreen, protecting their skin from harsh ultraviolet radiation. Though tough, an elephant's
skin is very sensitive. Without regular mud baths to protect it from burning, as well as from
insect bites and moisture loss, an elephant's skin would suffer serious damage. After bathing, the
elephant will usually use its trunk to blow dirt on its body to help dry and bake on its new
protective coat. As elephants are limited to smaller and smaller areas, there is less water
available, and local herds will often come too close over the right to use these limited resources.

Wallowing also aids the skin in regulating body temperatures. Elephants spend every day fighting
an uphill battle to stay cool. They have a very difficult time releasing heat through the skin
because, in proportion to their body size, they have very little of it. The ratio of an elephant's
mass to the surface area of its skin is many times that of a human. Elephants have even been
observed lifting up their legs to expose the soles of their feet, presumably in an effort to
expose more skin to the air. Since wild elephants live in very hot climates, they must have other
means of getting rid of excess heat.

Legs and feet
=============

Elephant using its feet to crush a watermelon prior to eating it



An elephant's legs are great straight pillars, as they must be to support its bulk. The elephant
needs less muscular power to stand because of its straight legs and large pad like feet. For this
reason an elephant can stand for very long periods of time without tiring. In fact, African
elephants rarely lie down unless they are sick or wounded. Indian elephants, in contrast, lie down
frequently.

The feet of an elephant are nearly round. African elephants have three nails on each hind foot,
and four on each front foot. Indian elephants have four nails on each hind foot and five on each
front foot. Beneath the bones of the foot is a tough, gelatine-like material that acts as a
cushion or shock absorber. Under the elephant's weight the foot swells, but it gets smaller when
the weight is removed. An elephant can sink deep into mud, but can pull its legs out readily
because its feet become smaller when they are lifted.

An elephant is a good swimmer and climber, but it can neither trot, run, jump, nor gallop. It has
only one gait, a sort of gliding shuffle, which it can step up to the speed of a human sprinter.
There are few animals that can travel farther in a day than the elephant.

Ears
====

An Elephant sanctuary at Punnathur kotta, Kerala, south India.



The large flapping ears of an elephant are also very important for temperature regulation.
Elephant ears are made of a very thin layer of skin stretched over cartilage and a rich network of
blood vessels. On hot days, elephants will flap their ears constantly, creating a slight breeze.
This breeze cools the surface blood vessels, and then the cooler blood gets circulated to the rest
of the animal's body. The hot blood entering the ears can be cooled as much as ten degrees
Fahrenheit before returning to the body. Differences in the ear sizes of African and Asian
elephants can be explained, in part, by their geographical distribution. Africans originated and
stayed near the equator, where it is warmer. Therefore, they have bigger ears. Asians live farther
north, in slightly cooler climates, and thus have smaller ears.

The ears are also used in certain displays of aggression and during the males' mating period. If
an elephant wants to intimidate a predator or rival, it will spread its ears out wide to make
itself look more massive and imposing. During the breeding season, males give off an odor from a
gland located behind their eyes. Joyce Poole, a well-known elephant researcher, has theorized that
the males will fan their ears in an effort to help propel this "elephant cologne" great distances.

Walking at a normal pace an elephant covers about 2 to 4 miles an hour (3 to 6 km/h) but they can
reach 24 miles an hour (40 km/h) at full speed.

Evolution
=========


Although the fossil evidence is uncertain, some scientists believe there is genetic evidence that
the elephant family shares distant ancestry with the Sirenians (sea cows) and the hyraxes. In the
distant past, members of the hyrax family grew to large sizes, and it seems likely that the common
ancestor of all three modern families was some kind of amphibious hyracoid. One theory suggests
that these animals spent most of their time under water, using their trunks like snorkels for
breathing. Modern elephants have retained this ability and are known to swim in that manner for up
to 6 hours and 50 km.

In the past, there was a much wider variety of elephant genera, including the mammoths, stegodons
and deinotheria. There was also a much wider variety of species.[14][15]

Diet
====


Elephants are herbivores, spending 16 hours a day collecting plant food. Their diet is at least
50% grasses, supplemented with leaves, bamboo, twigs, bark, roots, and small amounts of fruits,
seeds and flowers. Because elephants only digest 40% of what they eat, they have to make up for
their digestive system's lack of efficiency in volume. An adult elephant can consume 300â€?00 lb
(140â€?70 kg) of food a day. 60% of that food leaves the elephant's body undigested.

Intelligence
============

Human, dolphin and elephant brains up to scale. (1)-cerebrum (1a)-temporal lobe and (2)-cerebellum



With a mass just over 5kg, elephant brains are larger than those of any land animal, and although
the largest whales have body masses twentyfold those of a typical elephant, whale brains are
barely twice the mass of an elephant's. A wide variety of behavior, including those associated
with grief, art, play, use of tools], compassion, self-awareness and the best memory in the entire
animal kingdom (far better than human memory capacity), evidence a highly intelligent species
rivaled only by dolphins and primates.[16]

The largest areas in elephant brain are those responsible for hearing, smell and movement
coordination, and a large portion of the brain has to do with trunk management and sensitivity.

Increased out of any comparative proportion, the temporal lobe, responsible for processing of
audio information, hearing and language, is relatively far greater than that of dolphins (which
use elaborate echolocation) and humans (who use language and symbols).

Senses
======


The sensory capabilities of elephants are specific in their extremely well innervated trunks, and
their exceptional sense of hearing and smell. The hearing receptors reside not only in ears, but
also in trunks that are sensitive to vibrations, and most significantly feet, which have special
receptors for low frequency sound and are exceptionally well innervated. It is believed that sound
communication between elephants on large distances, through the ground, is important in their
social lives, and elephants are observed listening by putting trunks on the ground and carefully
moving their very sensitive feet.

Social behaviour
================


Elephants live in a very structured social order. The social lives of male and female elephants
are very different. The females spend their entire lives in tightly knit family groups made up of
mothers, daughters, sisters, and aunts. These groups are led by the eldest female, or matriarch.
Adult males, on the other hand, live mostly solitary lives.

The social circle of the female elephant does not end with the small family unit. In addition to
encountering the local males that live on the fringes of one or more groups, the female's life
also involves interaction with other families, clans, and subpopulations. Most immediate family
groups range from five to fifteen adults, as well as a number of immature males and females. When
a group gets too big, a few of the elder daughters will break off and form their own small group.
They remain very aware of which local herds are relatives and which are not.

The life of the adult male is very different. As he gets older, he begins to spend more time at
the edge of the herd, gradually going off on his own for hours or days at a time. Eventually, days
become weeks, and somewhere around the age of fourteen, the mature male, or bull, sets out from
his natal group for good. While males do live primarily solitary lives, they will occasionally
form loose associations with other males. These groups are called bachelor herds. The males spend
much more time than the females fighting for dominance with each other. Only the most dominant
males will be permitted to breed with cycling females. The less dominant ones must wait their
turn. It is usually the older bulls, forty to fifty years old, that do most of the breeding. The
dominance battles between males can look very fierce, but typically they inflict very little
injury. Most of the bouts are in the form of aggressive displays and bluffs. Ordinarily, the
smaller, younger, and less confident animal will back off before any real damage can be done.
However, during the breeding season, the battles can get extremely aggressive, and the occasional
elephant is injured. During this season, known as musth, a bull will fight with almost any other
male it encounters, and it will spend most of its time hovering around the female herds, trying to
find a receptive mate.

Self-awareness
==============


From a study reported in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, an Asian elephant housed
at the Bronx Zoo in New York, repeatedly touched a white cross painted above its eye, when it saw
this mark reflected in a large mirror. Another mark made on the forehead in colourless paint, was
ignored, showing that it was not the smell or feeling which caused the interest. These types of
experiments, widely done on many different species, are generally regarded as good indicators of
self awareness. Elephants are among the very small number of species such as the great apes and
Bottlenose Dolphins capable of this kind of self-recognition.[17][18]

Homosexuality
=============

A young elephant in Zimbabwe.



African, as well as Asiatic males will engage in same-sex bonding and mounting. Such encounters
are often associated with affectionate interactions such as kissing, trunk intertwining or placing
trunks in each other's mouth. The encounters are analogous to heterosexual bouts, one male often
extending his trunk along the other's back and pushing forward with his tusks to signify his
intention to mount. Unlike heterosexual relations, which are always of a fleeting nature, often
males will form a "companionship" consisting of an older individual and one or two younger
attendant males. Same sex relations are common and frequent in both sexes, with Asiatic elephants
in captivity devoting roughly 45% of sexual encounters to same-sex activity.[19]

Communication
=============


It has been discovered that elephants can communicate over long distances by producing and
receiving low frequency infrasound, a sub-sonic rumbling which can travel through the ground
farther than sound travels in the air. This can be felt by the sensitive skin of an elephant's
feet and trunk, which pick up the resonant vibrations in much the same way as the flat skin on the
head of a drum. To listen attentively, the whole herd will lift one foreleg from the ground, and
face the source of the sound, or often lay their trunks on the ground - the lifting presumably
increases the ground contact and sensitivity of the remaining legs. This ability is thought to
also aid their navigation by utilizing external sources of infrasound. Discovery of this new
aspect of elephant social communication and perception is due to breakthroughs in audio
technology, which can pick up frequencies outside the range of the human ear. Pioneering research
in elephant infrasound communication was done by Katy Payne of the Elephant Listening Project,[20]
and is detailed in her book Silent Thunder. Though this research is still in its infancy, it is
helping to solve many prior mysteries such as how elephants can find distant potential mates, and
how social groups are able to coordinate their movements over an extensive territory range.

Reproduction, calves, and calf rearing
======================================

Reproduction
============


Females (cows) reach sexual maturity at around 9-12 years of age and become pregnant for the first
time, on average, around age 13. They can reproduce until ages 55-60. Females give birth at
intervals of about every 5 years. An elephant's gestation (pregnancy) period lasts about 22 months
(630-660 days), the longest gestation period of any mammal, after which typically one calf is
born. Twins are rare. Labor ranges in length from 5 minutes to 60 hours. The average length of
labor is 11 hours. At birth, calves weigh around 90â€?15 kg (200â€?50 lb), and they gain 1 kg
(2â€?.5 lb) a day. In the wild, the mother is accompanied by other adult females (aunts) that
protect the young, and baby elephants are raised and nurtured by the whole family group,
practically from the moment they are born.

Motherhood and calf rearing
===========================


* The first sound a newborn calf usually makes is a sneezing or snorting sound to clear its
  nasal passages of fluids. (In the first few minutes after a captive birth, the keepers must
  monitor the calf closely for the first sound or movement. Whichever happens first, the mother
  typically responds to her new baby with surprise and excitement.)
* With the help of its mother, a newborn calf usually struggles to its feet within 30 minutes of
  birth. For support, it will often lean on its mother's legs.
* A newborn calf usually stands within one hour and is strong enough to follow its mother in a
  slow-moving herd within a few days.
* Unlike most mammals, female elephants have a single pair of mammary glands located just behind
  the front legs. When born, a calf is about 3 ft (90 cm) high, just tall enough to reach its
  mother's nipples.

  African elephant calf suckling



* A calf suckles with its mouth, not its trunk, which has no muscle tone. To clear the way to
  its mouth so it can suckle, the calf will flop its trunk onto its forehead.
* A newborn calf suckles for only a few minutes at a time but will suckle many times per day,
  consuming up to 11 litres (3 gallons) of milk in a single day.
* A calf may nurse for up to 2 years of age or older. Complete weaning depends on the
  disposition of the mother, the amount of available milk, and the arrival of another calf.
* Newborn calves learn primarily by observing adults, not from instinct. For example, a calf
  learns how to use its trunk by watching older elephants using their trunks.
* It takes several months for a calf to control the use of its trunk. This can be observed as
  the calf trips over its trunk or as the trunk wiggles like a rubbery object when the calf shakes
  its head.

Elephant calves
===============


Elephant social life, in many ways, revolves around breeding and raising of the calves. A female
will usually be ready to breed around the age of thirteen, at which time she will seek out the
most attractive male to mate with. Females are generally attracted to bigger, stronger, and, most
importantly, older males. Such a reproductive strategy tends to increase their offspring's chances
of survival.

After a twenty-two-month pregnancy, the mother will give birth to a calf that will weigh about 250
lb and stand over 2Â½ feet tall. Elephants have a very long childhood. They are born with fewer
survival instincts than many other animals. Instead, they must rely on their elders to teach them
the things they need to know. The ability to pass on information and knowledge to their young has
always been a major asset in the elephant's struggle to survive. Today, however, the pressures
humans have put on the wild elephant populations, from poaching to habitat destruction, mean that
the elderly often die at a younger age, leaving fewer teachers for the young.

All members of the tightly knit female group participate in the care and protection of the young.
Since everyone in the herd is related, there is never a shortage of baby-sitters. In fact, a new
calf is usually the center of attention for all herd members. All the adults and most of the other
young will gather around the newborn, touching and caressing it with their trunks. The baby is
born nearly blind and at first relies, almost completely, on its trunk to discover the world
around it.

Allomothers
===========


After the initial excitement dies down, the mother will usually select several full-time
baby-sitters, or "allomothers", from her group. According to Cynthia Moss, a well-known
researcher, these allomothers will help in all aspects of raising the calf.] They walk with the
young as the herd travels, helping the calves along if they fall or get stuck in the mud. The more
allomothers a baby has, the more free time its mother has to feed herself. Providing a calf with
nutritious milk means the mother has to eat more nutritious food herself. So, the more
allomothers, the better the calf's chances of survival. An elephant is considered an allomother
when she is not able to have her own baby. A benefit of being an allomother is that she can gain
experience or receive assistance when caring for her own calf.

Effect on the environment
=========================


Elephants' foraging activities help to maintain the areas in which they live:

* By pulling down trees to eat leaves, breaking branches, and pulling out roots they create
  clearings in which new young trees and other vegetation grow to provide future nutrition for
  elephants and other organisms.
* Elephants make pathways through the environment that are used by other animals to access areas
  normally out of reach. The pathways have been used by several generations of elephants, and
  today people are converting many of them to paved roads.
* During the dry season elephants use their tusks to dig into dry river beds to reach
  underground sources of water. These newly dug water holes may become the only source of water in
  the area.
* Elephants are a species which many other organisms depend on. For example, termites eat
  elephant feces and often begin building termite mounds under piles of elephant feces.

Threat of extinction
====================

Hunting
=======


The threat to the African elephant presented by the ivory trade is unique to the species. Larger,
long-lived, slow-breeding animals, like the elephant, are more susceptible to overhunting than
other animals. They cannot hide, and it takes many years for an elephant to grow and reproduce. An
elephant needs an average of 300 lb (140 kg) of vegetation a day to survive. As large predators
are hunted, the local small grazer populations (the elephant's food competitors) find themselves
on the rise. The increased number of herbivores ravage the local trees, shrubs, and grasses.
Elephants themselves have few natural predators besides man and, occasionally, lions.

Dehabitation
============


Another threat to elephant's survival in general is the ongoing cultivation of their habitats with
increasing risk of conflicts of interest with human cohabitants. These conflicts kill 150
elephants and up to 100 people per year in Sri Lanka.[21] Lacking the massive tusks of its African
cousins, the Asian elephant's demise can be attributed mostly to loss of its habitat.

As larger patches of forest disappear, the ecosystem is affected in profound ways. The trees are
responsible for anchoring soil and absorbing water runoff. Floods and massive erosion are common
results of deforestation. Elephants need massive tracts of land because, much like the
slash-and-burn farmers, they are used to crashing through the forest, tearing down trees and
shrubs for food and then cycling back later on, when the area has regrown. As forests are reduced
to small pockets, elephants become part of the problem, quickly destroying all the vegetation in
an area, eliminating all their resources.

Controversy
===========


Despite all the fears of extinction, some scholars claim that the elephant population of Africa as
a whole has actually increased over the past ten years, most notably in Botswana, which currently
is experiencing elephant overpopulation. [6]

National parks
==============

An elephant in the Ngorongoro crater, Tanzania.



Africa's first official reserve eventually became one of the world's most famous and successful
national parks. Kruger National Park in South Africa first became a reserve against great
opposition in 1898 (then Sabi Reserve). It was deproclaimed and reproclaimed several times before
it was renamed and granted national park status in 1926. It was to be the first of many.

Of course, there were many problems in establishing these reserves. For example, elephants range
through a wide tract of land with little regard for national borders. however, when most parks
were created, the boundaries were drawn at the human-made borders of individual countries. Once a
fence was erected, many animals found themselves cut off from their winter feeding grounds or
spring breeding areas. Some animals died as a result, while some, like the elephants, just
trampled through the fences. This did little to belie their image as a crop-raiding pest. The more
often an elephant wandered off its reserve, the more trouble it got into, and the more chance it
had of being shot by an angry farmer. When confined to small territories, elephants can inflict an
enormous amount of damage to the local landscapes. Today there are still many problems associated
with these parks and reserves, but there is now little question as to whether or not they are
necessary. As scientists learn more about nature and the environment, it becomes very clear that
these parks may be the elephant's last hope against the rapidly changing world around them.

Additionally, Kruger National Park has suffered from elephant overcrowding, at the expense of
other species of wildlife within the reserve. South Africa slaughtered 14,562 elephants in the
reserve between 1967 and 1994; it stopped in 1995, mostly due to international and local pressure.
Without action, it is predicted that the elephant population in Kruger National Park will triple
to 34,000 by 2020.[22]

Humanity and elephants
======================

Harvest from the wild
=====================


The harvest of elephants, both legal and illegal, has had some unexpected consequences on elephant
anatomy as well. African ivory hunters, by killing only tusked elephants, have given a much larger
chance of mating to elephants with small tusks or no tusks at all. The propagation of the
absent-tusk gene has resulted in the birth of large numbers of tuskless elephants, now approaching
30% in some populations (compare with a rate of about 1% in 1930). Tusklessness, once a very rare
genetic abnormality, has become a widespread hereditary trait.

It is possible, if unlikely, that continued selection pressure could bring about a complete
absence of tusks in African elephants, a development normally requiring thousands of years of
evolution. The effect of tuskless elephants on the environment, and on the elephants themselves,
could be dramatic. Elephants use their tusks to root around in the ground for necessary minerals,
tear apart vegetation, and spar with one another for mating rights. Without tusks, elephant
behavior could change dramatically.[23]

Domestication and use
=====================

Left to right - African Savanna Elephant Loxodonta africana, born 1969, and Asian Elephant Elephas
maximus, born 1970, at an English zoo.



Elephants have been working animals used in various capacities by humans. Seals found in the Indus
Valley suggest that the elephant was first domesticated in ancient India. However, elephants have
never been truly domesticated: the male elephant in his periodic condition of musth is dangerous
and difficult to control. Therefore elephants used by humans have typically been female, war
elephants being an exception, however: as female elephants in battle will run from a male, only
males could be used in war. It is generally more economical to capture wild young elephants and
tame them than breeding them in captivity (see also elephant "crushing").

War elephants were used by armies in the Indian sub-continent, and later by the Persian empire.
This use was adopted by Hellenistic armies after Alexander the Great experienced their worth
against king Porus, notably in the Ptolemaic and Seleucid diadoch empires. The Carthaginian
general Hannibal took elephants across the Alps when he was fighting the Romans, but brought too
few elephants to be of much military use, although his horse cavalry was quite successful; he
probably used a now-extinct third African (sub)species, the North African (Forest) elephant,
smaller than its two southern cousins, and presumably easier to domesticate. A large elephant in
full charge could cause tremendous damage to infantry, and cavalry horses would be afraid of them
(see Battle of Hydaspes).

Throughout Siam, India, and most of South Asia elephants were used in the military for heavy
labor, especially for uprooting trees and moving logs, and were also commonly used as executioners
to crush the condemned underfoot.

Elephant footprints (tire tracks for scale)



Elephants have also been used as mounts for safari-type hunting, especially Indian shikar (mainly
on tigers), and as ceremonial mounts for royal and religious occasions, whilst Asian elephants
have been used for transport and entertainment, and are common to circuses around the world.

African elephants have long been reputed to not be domesticable, but some entrepreneurs have
succeeded by bringing Asian mahouts from Sri Lanka to Africa. In Botswana, Uttum Corea has been
working with African elephants and has several young tame elephants near Gaborone. African
elephants are more temperamental than Asian elephants, but are easier to train. Because of their
more sensitive temperaments, they require different training methods than Asian elephants and must
be trained from infancy hence Corea worked with orphaned elephants. African elephants are now
being used for (photo) safaris. Corea's elephants are also used to entertain tourists and haul
logs.

Elephants are also commonly exhibited in zoos and wild animal parks, the former of which has
caused controversy. Animal rights advocates allege that elephants in zoos "suffer a life of
chronic physical ailments, social deprivation, emotional starvation, and premature death". [7]
However, zoos argue that standards for treatment of elephants are extremely high and that minimum
requirements for such things as minimum space requirements, enclosure design, nutrition,
reproduction, enrichment and veterinary care are set to ensure the wellbeing of elephants in
captivity.

Elephant traps
==============


A method of confining elephants practiced in the Indian Subcontinent is far less physical and
brutal, and more psychological, than earlier means. It is called the "elephant trap". The
following is taken from a newsletter:

        From when an elephant is a baby they tie him for certain periods with a rope to a tree.
        The young elephant tries his hardest to escape, he pulls and wriggles and jumps and crawls
        yet the rope just tightens and to the tree it remains tied. Learning that, the elephant
        doesnâ€™t try to escape and accepts his confinement. A couple of years pass and the
        elephant is now an adult weighing several tons. Yet the trainer continues to tie the
        elephant to the tree with the same rope heâ€™s always used, for the simple reason that the
        elephant has the concept in his mind that the rope is stronger than him. Abiding to this
        conditioning the elephant is trapped for life. To break free all the elephant has to do is
        erase that limiting thought for in fact he is free to go.

Elephants in culture
====================


* George Orwell wrote a famous essay entitled "Shooting an Elephant," chronicling a 1926 episode
  of being forced to shoot an elephant while he served as an Imperial Policeman in Burma.

Pop culture
===========


* Jumbo, a circus elephant, has entered the English language as a synonym for "large".
* Dumbo, the elephant who learns to fly in the Disney movie of the same name.
* The French children's storybook character Babar the Elephant (an elephant king) created by
  Jean de Brunhoff and also an animated TV series.
* The Oakland Athletics mascot is a white elephant. The story of picking the mascot was started
  when New York Giants' manager John McGraw told reporters that Philadelphia manufacturer Benjamin
  Shibe, who owned the controlling interest in the new team, had a â€œwhite elephant on his
  hands," Connie Mack defiantly adopted the white elephant as the team mascot, though over the
  years the elephant has appeared in several different colors (currently forest green). The Aâ€™s
  are sometimes, though infrequently, referred to as the Elephants or White Elephants. The team
  mascot is nicknamed Stomper.
* The Elephant's Child is one of Rudyard Kipling's Just So Stories.
* Horton Hatches the Egg is a book by Dr. Seuss about a faithful elephant who sits on the nest
  of an irresponsible bird for months.
* Joseph Merrick, a British man in Victorian England, who suffered from substantial deformities,
  and was nicknamed "The Elephant Man" due to the nature and extent of his condition.
* American band the White Stripes' fourth album was entitled Elephant, possibly because of lead
  singer Jack White's fondness of the animals' extreme sensitivity toward each other. The album
  was #390 in Rolling Stone magazine's "500 Best Albums of All Time."
* The Thai movie Tom-Yum-Goong (US title: "The Protector", UK title: "Warrior King") is about a
  man named Kham who travels from Thailand to Australia in pursuit of poachers who have stolen two
  elephants. Kham is a member of a family that protects the elephants of the King of Thailand. The
  movie was directed by Prachya Pinkaew and stars Tony Jaa.
* The elephant joke, which typically relies on the elephant's characteristics (particularly its
  size) for its humor, became popular in the 20th century.
* In J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings story, there exist oliphaunts, house-sized
  versions of elephants.

Esala Perahera in Kandy, Sri Lanka

Religion and philosophy
=======================

An elephant carrying Thidambu during Thrissur Pooram festival in Kerala, south India



* The scattered skulls of prehistoric pygmy elephants on Crete, featuring a single large nasal
  cavity at the front, may have formed the basis of belief in existence of cyclops, the one-eyed
  giants featured in Homer's Odyssey.
* A white elephant is considered holy in Thailand.
* Ganesh, the Hindu god of wisdom, has an elephant's head.
* Elephants are used in festivals in Sri Lanka, such as the Esala Perahera.
* Temple elephant
* Guruvayur Keshavan famous temple elephant in Kerala, India
* The story of the Blind Men and an Elephant was written to show how reality may be viewed by
  different perspectives. Its source is unknown, but it appears to have originated in India. It
  has been attributed to Buddhists, Hindus, Jainists, and Sufis, and was also used by Discordians.
* In Judeo-Christian accounts, including Midrash on the sixth chapter of the apocryphal book of
  1 Maccabees, the youngest of the Hasmonean brothers, Eleazar the Maccabee stuck a spear under
  the foot of an elephant carrying an important Greek-Assyrian general, killing the elephant, the
  general, and Eleazar.

Politics and secular symbolism
==============================

The newspaper clip shows election officials carrying the EVM (Electronic Voting Machine) on an
elephant. These officials are travelling to a remote polling station, inaccessible by other means
of transport.



* After Alexander's victory over the Indian king Porus, the captured war elephants became a
  symbol of imperial power, used as an emblem of the Seleucid diadoch empire, e.g. on coins.
* The elephant, and the white elephant (also a religious symbol of Buddha) in particular, has
  often been used as a symbol of royal power and prestige in Asia; occurring on the flag of the
  kingdom Laos (three visible, supporting an umbrella, another symbol of royal power) till it
  became a republic in 1975, and other Indochinese and Thai realms had also displayed one or more
  white elephants.
* The elephant is also the symbol for the Republican Party of the United States, originating in
  an 1874 cartoon of an Asian elephant by Thomas Nast of Harper's Weekly (Nast also originated the
  donkey as the symbol of the Democratic Party).
* See also the Danish royal Order of the Elephant.

Elephant rage
=============


Elephants are among the world's most potentially dangerous animals, capable of crushing and
killing any other land animal, from rhinocerous and lions to humans. They can experience
unexpected bouts of rage, and can be vindictive [8]. In Africa, groups of young teenage elephants
attack human villages in what is thought to be revenge for the destruction of their society by
massive cullings done in the 1970s and 80s [9]. In India, male elephants attack villages at night,
destroying homes and killing people on a regular basis. In the Indian state of Jharkhand, 300
people were killed by elephants between 2000 and 2004, and in Assam, 239 people have been killed
by elephants since 2001 [10]. Elephants kill hundreds of people every year; in India alone there
are up to 200 elephant-caused human deaths every year, and in Sri Lanka around 50 per year [11].

Musth
=====


Adult male elephants naturally enter the periodic state called musth (Hindi for madness),
sometimes spelt "must" in English. It is characterised by very excited and/or aggressive behavior
and a thick, tar-like liquid secretion that discharges through the temporal ducts from the
temporal glands on the sides of the head. Musth is linked to sexual arousal or establishing
dominance but this relationship is far from clear. A musth elephant, wild or domesticated, is
extremely dangerous to humans. Domesticated elephants in India are traditionally tied to a tree
and denied food and water for several days, after which the musth passes. In zoos, musth is often
the cause of fatal accidents to elephant keepers. Zoos keeping adult male elephants need extremely
secure enclosures, which greatly complicates the attempts to breed elephants in zoos.

Musth is accompanied by a significant rise in reproductive hormones. Testosterone levels in an
elephant in musth can be as much as 60 times greater than in the same elephant at other times.
However, whether this hormonal surge is the sole cause of musth, or merely a contributing factor
is unknown: scientific investigation of musth is greatly hindered by the fact that even the most
otherwise placid of elephants may actively try to kill any and all humans. Similarly, the tar-like
secretion remains largely uncharacterised, due to the extreme difficulties of collecting a sample
for analysis.

Although it has often been speculated that musth is linked to rut, this is unlikely, because the
female elephant's estrus cycle is not seasonally-linked. Furthermore, bulls in musth have often
been known to attack female elephants, regardless of whether or not the females are in heat.

The Hindi word "musth" is from the Urdu mast, which in turn is from a Persian root meaning
'intoxicated'.

The Channel 5 British television program "The Dark Side of Elephants" (20 March 2006) stated that
during musth:

* The swelling of the temporal glands presses on the elephant's eyes and causes the elephant
  severe pain like severe root abscess toothache. One elephant behaviour that tries to counteract
  this is digging the tusks in the ground.
* The musth secretion, which naturally runs down into the elephant's mouth, is full of ketones
  and aldehydes and (to a person at least) tastes unbelievably foul.
* As a result, musth behaviour is at least partly due to the elephant being driven mad by pain
  and distress.

Other causes
============

Steve Hirano attempts to hold Tyke the elephant behind a fenced gate as the animal went on a
rampage.



At least a few elephants have been suspected to be drunk during their attacks. In December 1998, a
herd of elephants overran a village in India. Although locals reported that nearby elephants had
recently been observed drinking beer which rendered them "unpredictable", officials considered it
the least likely explanation for the attack.[24] An attack on another Indian village occurred in
October 1999, and again locals believed the reason was drunkenness, but the theory was not widely
accepted.[25] Purportedly drunk elephants raided yet another Indian village again on December
2002, killing six people, which led to killing of about 200 elephants by locals.[26]

Charles Siebert reports in his New York Times article An Elephant Crackup? that:

        Since the early 1990â€™s, for example, young male elephants in Pilanesberg National Park
        and the Hluhluwe-Umfolozi Game Reserve in South Africa have been raping and killing
        rhinoceroses; this abnormal behavior, according to a 2001 study in the journal Pachyderm,
        has been reported in â€˜â€˜a number of reservesâ€™â€?in the region.[27]

However, Rob Slotow, author of the cited article in Pachyderm, denies that any rape took place.[28]

Rogue elephant
==============


Rogue elephant is a term for a lone, violently aggressive wild elephant, separated from the rest
of the herd. It is a calque of the Sinhala term hora aliya. Its introduction to English has been
attributed by the Oxford English Dictionary to Sir James Emerson Tennant, but this usage may have
been pre-dated by William Sirr.

Natural predators
=================


In some parts of Africa lions prey on elephants. Lions are the only known natural predators of
elephants. Lions attack Elephant


See also
========


* Ability to swim
* Blind Men and an Elephant
* Crushing by elephant
* Dwarf elephant
* Elephant's graveyard
* Elephant (movie)
* Elephant ear
* Elephant joke
* Elephant in the corner
* Elephant sanctuary
* Elephants in Kerala culture
* History of elephants in Europe
* Temple elephant
* War elephant
* White elephant
* Year of the Elephant
* Pinnawala Elephant Orphanage
* Category:Famous elephants
* Category:Fictional elephants

