Guinea pig
==========

This article is about the species Cavia porcellus. For the parent genus, see Cavia. For other
uses, see Guinea pig

Kingdom: Animalia

Phylum: Chordata

Class: Mammalia

Order: Rodentia

Suborder: Hystricomorpha

Family: Caviidae

Subfamily: Caviinae

Genus: Cavia

Species: C. porcellus



Binomial name

Cavia porcellus
(Erxleben, 1777)

Synonyms


Mus porcellus
Cavia cobaya
Cavia anolaimae
Cavia cutleri
Cavia leucopyga
Cavia longipilis

Guinea pigs (also called cavies after their scientific name) are rodents belonging to the family
Caviidae and the genus Cavia. Despite their common name, the animals are not pigs, nor do they
come from Guinea. They are originally native to the Andes, and while they are no longer extant in
the wild, they are closely related to several species which are commonly found in the grassy
plains and plateaus of this region. The guinea pig plays an important role in the folk culture of
indigenous South Americans, especially as a food source, but also as an implement in folk medicine
and in community religious ceremonies.[1] Since the 1960s, the guinea pig has become increasingly
important as a staple food in the Andes, and efforts have been made to increase consumption of the
animal outside South America.

In Western societies, the guinea pig has enjoyed widespread popularity as a household pet since
its introduction by European traders in the sixteenth century. Because of its docile nature, the
relative ease of caretaking, and its responsiveness to handling and feeding, the guinea pig
continues to be a popular pet choice. Organizations devoted to competitive breeding of guinea pigs
have been formed worldwide, and a large number of specialized breeds of guinea pig, with varying
coat colors and compositions, are cultivated by breeders.

"Guinea pig" is also used as a by-word in English for a subject of experimentation; this usage
became common in the first half of the twentieth century. Biological experimentation on guinea
pigs has been carried out since the seventeenth century; the animals were frequently used in
scientific contexts in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, but have since been largely
replaced by other rodents, such as mice and rats. They are still used in research primarily as
models for human medical conditions such as juvenile diabetes, tuberculosis, scurvy, and pregnancy
complications.

Contents
========



* History
* Name
* Traits and environment
  o Natural habitat
  o Domestication
  o Behavior

* Breeding
* Diet
* Health
* Guinea pigs as pets
* Guinea pigs in scientific research
* Guinea pigs as food
* References
  o General references
  o Footnotes

* See also
* External links

History
=======

Among the Quechuas, black guinea pigs are considered holy and are used by folk doctors.[2]



The common guinea pig was first domesticated as early as 5000 BC for food by mountain tribes in
the Andean region of South America (present-day Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia).[3] Statues dating from
ca. 500 BC to 500 AD which depict guinea pigs have been unearthed in archaeological digs in Peru
and Ecuador.[4] From ca. 1200 AD to the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire in 1532, selective
breeding resulted in a number of different varieties of domestic guinea pigs, which form the basis
for some of the modern domestic breeds.[5] They continue to be a food source in the region; most
households in the Andean highlands raise the animal, which subsists off the family's vegetable
scraps in kitchens.[6] Folklore traditions involving guinea pigs abound; they are exchanged as
gifts, used in customary social and religious ceremonies, and are frequently referenced in spoken
metaphors.[7] They also play a role in some traditional healing rituals by folk doctors, or
curanderos, who use the animals in treatments for diseases such as jaundice, rheumatism,
arthritis, and typhus.[8] They are rubbed against the bodies of the sick, and are seen as a medium
through which supernatural healing occurs.[9] The animal may also be cut open and its entrails
examined to determine whether or not the cure was effective.[10] These methods are widely accepted
in many parts of the Andes, where Western medicine is either unavailable or distrusted.[11]

Spanish, Dutch and English traders brought guinea pigs to Europe, where they quickly became
popular as exotic pets among the upper classes and royalty, including Queen Elizabeth I.[12] The
earliest known written account of the guinea pig dates from 1547, in a description of the animal
from Santo Domingo; because cavies are not native to Hispaniola, the animal must have been
introduced there by Spanish travelers.[13] The guinea pig was first described in the West in 1554
by the Swiss naturalist Konrad Gesner.[14] Its binomial scientific name was first used by Erxleben
in 1777; it is an amalgam of Pallas's generic designation (1766) and Linnaeus's specific conferral
(1758).[13]

Name
====

Look up guinea pig in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.


The scientific name of the common species is Cavia porcellus, with porcellus being Latin for
"little pig". Cavia is New Latin; it is derived from cabiai, the animal's name in the language of
the Galibi tribes once native to French Guiana.[15] Cabiai is thought to be an adaptation of the
Portuguese Ã§avia (now savia), which is itself derived from the Tupi word saujÃ¡, meaning rat.[16]
Guinea pigs are called quwi or jaca in Quechua and cuy or cuyo (pl. cuyes, cuyos) in the Spanish
of Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia.[17] Paradoxically, breeders tend to use the more formal "cavy" to
describe the animal, while in scientific and laboratory contexts it is far more commonly referred
to by the more colloquial "guinea pig".[18]

How the animals came to be thought of as "pigs" is not clear. They are built somewhat like a pig,
with a large head relative to the body, a stout neck, and a rounded rump with no tail of any
consequence; some of the sounds they emit are very similar to those made by pigs, and they also
spend a large amount of time eating.[19] They can survive for long periods of time in small
quarters, like a 'pig pen', and were thus easily transported on ships to Europe.[20]

The animal's name carries porcine connotations in many European languages. The German word for
them is Meerschweinchen, literally "little sea pigs". This derives from nautical history: sailing
ships stopping to reprovision in the New World would pick up stores of guinea pigs, which provided
an easily transportable source of fresh meat; Meerschwein is German for porpoise, which was
another food source for sailors. The French term is Cochon d'Inde (Indian pig); the Dutch used to
call it guinees biggetje (Guinean piglet), and in Portuguese the guinea pig is sometimes referred
to as porquinho da Ã?ndia (little Indian pig). This is not universal; for example, the common
Spanish word is conejillo de Indias (little rabbit of India / the Indies).[17]

The origin of "guinea" in "guinea pig" is even harder to explain. One theory is that the animals
were brought to Europe by way of Guinea, leading people to think they had originated there.[18]
"Guinea" was also frequently used in English to refer generally to any far-off, unknown country,
and so the name may simply be a colorful reference to the animal's foreignness.[21] Another theory
suggests the "guinea" in the name is a corruption of "Guiana", an area in South America, though
the animals are not native to that region.[21][22] A common misconception is that they were so
named because they were sold as the closest thing to a pig one could get for a guinea coin; this
theory is untenable, because the guinea was first struck in England in 1663, and William Harvey
used the term "Ginny-pig" as early as 1653.[23] Others believe "guinea" may be an alteration of
the word coney; guinea pigs were referred to as "pig coneys" in Edward Topsell's 1607 treatise on
quadrupeds.[18]

Traits and environment
======================

Two Abyssinian guinea pigs.



Guinea pigs are large for rodents, weighing between 1 and 2.5?pounds (700-1200?g), and measuring
8â€“10?inches (20â€“25?cm) long.[24] They typically live an average of four to five years, and
occasionally as long as eight years.[25] According to the 1997 Guinness Book of Records the
longest living guinea pig survived 15 years.[26]

Natural habitat
===============


Cavia porcellus is not found naturally in the wild; it is likely descendant from some closely
related species of cavies, such as Cavia aperea, Cavia fulgida, and Cavia tschudii, which are
still commonly found in various regions of South America.[13] Some species of cavy identified in
the twentieth century, such as Cavia anolaimae and Cavia guianae, may in fact be domestic guinea
pigs that have become feral by reintroduction into the wild.[5] Wild cavies are found on grassy
plains and occupy an ecological niche similar to that of the cow. They are social, living in the
wild in small groups which consist of several females (sows), a male (boar), and the young (which
in a break with the preceding porcine nomenclature are called pups). They move together in groups
(herds) eating grass or other vegetation, and do not store food.[27] While they do not burrow or
build nests, they frequently seek shelter in the burrows of other animals, as well as in crevices
and tunnels formed by vegetation.[27] They are crepuscular, tending to be most active during dawn
and dusk, when it is harder for predators to spot them.[28]

Domestication
=============


Domesticated guinea pigs thrive in groups of two or more; groups of sows, or groups of one or more
sows and a neutered boar are common combinations. Groups of boars may also get along, provided
that their cage has enough space, they are introduced at an early age, and no females are
present.[29] Domestic guinea pigs have developed a different biological rhythm from their wild
counterparts, and have longer periods of activity followed by short periods of sleep in
between.[28] Activity is scattered randomly over the 24 hours of the day; aside from avoidance of
intense light, no regular circadian patterns are apparent.[28]

Domestic guinea pigs generally live in cages, though some owners of large numbers of guinea pigs
will dedicate entire rooms to their pets. Cages with solid or wire mesh floors are used, although
wire mesh floors can cause injury and may be associated with an infection commonly known as
bumblefoot (ulcerative pododermatitis).[30] "Cubes and Coroplast" (or C&C) style cages are now a
common choice.[31] Cages are often lined with wood shavings or a similar material. Bedding made
from red cedar and pine, both softwoods, were commonly used in past decades but are now believed
to contain harmful phenols (aromatic hydrocarbons) and oils.[32] Safer beddings include those made
from hardwoods (such as aspen or hemp); paper products and corn cob are other alternatives.[32]
Guinea pigs tend to be messy within their cages; they often jump into their food bowls or kick
bedding and feces into them, and their urine crystallizes on cage surfaces and can be difficult to
remove.[33] After cage cleaning, a guinea pig will typically urinate and drag the lower body
across the floor of the cage in order to mark its territory.[34]

Guinea pigs do not generally thrive when housed with other species. Cohousing of guinea pigs with
other rodents such as gerbils and hamsters may increase instances of respiratory and other
infections,[35] and such rodents may act aggressively towards the guinea pig.[36] Larger animals
may regard guinea pigs as prey, though some (such as dogs) can be trained to accept them.[37]
Opinion is divided over the cohousing of guinea pigs and domestic rabbits. Some published sources
say that guinea pigs and rabbits complement each other well when sharing a cage.[37][38] However,
as lagomorphs, rabbits have different nutritional requirements, and so the two species cannot be
fed the same food.[39] Rabbits may also harbor diseases (such as the respiratory infections
Bordetella and Pasteurella), which guinea pigs are susceptible to.[40] Even the dwarf rabbit is
much stronger than the guinea pig and may cause intentional or inadvertent injury.[41]

Behavior
========


Guinea pigs can learn complex paths to food; they can accurately remember the learned path for
weeks and months. Their strongest problem solving strategy is moving.[42] While guinea pigs can
jump small obstacles, they cannot climb, and are not particularly agile. However, they startle
extremely easily, and will either freeze in place for long periods of time or run for cover with
rapid, darting motions when they sense danger.[28] Larger groups of startled guinea pigs will
"stampede", running in haphazard directions as a means of confusion.[43] When excited, guinea pigs
may repeatedly perform little hops in the air (known as "popcorning").[44] They are also
exceedingly good swimmers.[45]

Unlike many other rodents, guinea pigs do not participate in social grooming, though they
regularly self-groom.[46] A milky-white substance is secreted from their eyes and rubbed into the
hair during the grooming process.[47] Groups of boars will often chew each others' hair, but this
(along with biting, especially of the ears) is a method of establishing hierarchy within a group,
rather than a social gesture.[45]

Guinea pigs have poor sense of sight, but well-developed senses of hearing and olfaction.[48]
Vocalization is the primary means of communication between members of the species.[49] Some sounds
are:[50][51]

* Wheek or Whistle- A loud noise that is essentially onomatopoeic. An expression of general
  excitement, it may occur in response to the presence of its owner or to food replenishment. It
  is sometimes used to find other guinea pigs if they are in a run. If a guinea pig is lost, it
  may wheek for assistance. listen?(helpÂ·info)
* Bubbling or Purring - This sound is made when the guinea pig is enjoying itself, when being
  petted or held. They may also make this sound when grooming, crawling around to investigate a
  new place, or when given food. listen?(helpÂ·info)â€Ž
* Rumbling - This sound is normally related to dominance within a group, though it can also come
  as a response to comfort or contentment. Whilst courting, a male usually purrs deeply, while
  swaying from side to side, nearly lifting the rear feet. listen?(helpÂ·info)
* Chutting and Whining - These are sounds made in pursuit situations, by the pursuer and
  pursuee, respectively. listen?(helpÂ·info)
* Chattering - This sound is made by rapidly gnashing the teeth together, and is generally a
  sign of warning. Guinea pigs tend to raise their heads when making this sound.
* Squealing or Shrieking - A high-pitched sound of discontent, in response to pain or danger.
  listen?(helpÂ·info)
* Chirping - This less-common sound seems to be related to stress. listen?(helpÂ·info)

Breeding
========

Pregnant sow one week before delivering three pups.



The guinea pig is able to breed year-round, with birth peaks usually coming in the spring; as many
as five litters can be produced per year.[5] The gestation period lasts from 59-72 days, with an
average of 63-68 days.[34] Because of the long gestation period and the large size of the pups,
pregnant females may become large and eggplant-shaped (aubergine), although the change in size and
shape varies among individual animals. Pups are already well developed at birth, including hair,
teeth, claws and partial eyesight.[45] The young are mobile from birth, and depending on the
environment, will usually venture outdoors within a week. Pups begin eating solid food after a
couple of days, though they continue to suckle also. Litters generally yield 1-6 young, with an
average of 3.[25] In smaller litters, difficulties may occur during labour, due to over-sized
pups. Large litters may result in higher incidences of stillbirth, but because the pups are
delivered at an advanced stage of development, lack of access to mother's milk has little effect
on the mortality rate of newborns.[52] Cohabitating females may assist in mothering duties if
lactating.[53]

Guinea pig pup at eight hours old.



Sexing of guinea pigs can be difficult, as males and females do not differ in external appearance
apart from general size, and the position of the anus is very close to the genitals in both sexes.
Female genitals are distinguished by a Y-shaped configuration formed from a vaginal flap; while
the male genitals may look similar with the penis and anus forming a like shape, the penis will
protrude if pressure is applied to the surrounding hair.[54] The male's testes may also be visible
externally from scrotal swelling.

Males reach sexual maturity at 3-5 weeks; females can be fertile as early as four weeks and can
carry litters before they themselves are adults.[55] Females that have never been bred commonly
develop irreversible fusing of the pubic symphysis, a joint in the pelvis, after six months of
age.[34] If they become pregnant after this has happened, the birth canal will not widen
sufficiently, this may lead to dystocia and death as they attempt to give birth.[56] Females can
become pregnant in 6-48 hours after giving birth, and it is not healthy for a female to be in
virtually a constant state of pregnancy.[57]

Toxemia of pregnancy is common and kills many pregnant females. Signs of toxemia include anorexia,
lack of energy, excessive salivation, a ketone breath odor, and seizures in advanced cases.[58]
Pregnancy toxemia appears to be most common in hot climates.[59] Other serious complications of
pregnancy can include a prolapsed uterus, hypocalcemia, and mastitis.[60]

Diet
====

An Agouti guinea pig eating grass.



Grass is the guinea pig's natural diet. Their molars are particularly suited for grinding plant
matter, and grow continuously throughout the animal's life.[61] Most grass-eating mammals are
quite large and have a long digestive tract; while guinea pigs have much longer colons than most
rodents, they must also supplement their diet by practicing coprophagy, the eating of their own
feces.[62] However, they do not consume their feces indiscriminately. They produce special soft
pellets, called cecotropes, which recycle B vitamins, fiber, and bacteria required for proper
digestion.[63] The cecotropes (or caecal pellets) are eaten directly from the anus, unless the
guinea pig is pregnant or obese.[39] They share this behaviour with rabbits. In older boars (the
condition is rarer in young ones), the muscles which allow the softer pellets to be expelled from
the anus for consumption can become weak. This creates a condition known as anal impaction, which
prevents the boar from redigesting cecotropes, though harder pellets may pass through the impacted
mass.[64] The condition may be temporarily alleviated by carefully expelling the impacted feces.

Guinea pigs benefit from feeding on fresh grass hay, such as timothy hay, in addition to food
pellets which are often based from timothy. Alfalfa is also a popular food choice; most guinea
pigs will eat large amounts of alfalfa when offered it,[65] though there exists some controversy
over the feeding of alfalfa to adult guinea pigs. Some pet owners and veterinary organizations
have advised that, as a legume rather than a grass hay, alfalfa consumed in large amounts may lead
to obesity, as well as bladder stones due to excess calcium, in any but pregnant and very young
guinea pigs.[66][67] However, published scientific sources mention alfalfa as a source for
replenishment of protein, amino acids and fiber.[68][69]

Like humans, but unlike most other mammals, guinea pigs cannot synthesize their own vitamin C and
must obtain this vital nutrient from food. If guinea pigs do not ingest enough vitamin C, they can
suffer from scurvy and ultimately die. Guinea pigs require about 10?mg of vitamin C daily (20?mg
if pregnant), which can be obtained through fresh, raw fruits and vegetables (such as apple,
broccoli, cabbage, carrot, celery, and spinach) or through dietary supplements.[70] Healthy diets
for guinea pigs require a complex balance of calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, potassium, and
hydrogen ions; adequate amounts of vitamins E, A, and D are also necessary.[71] Imbalanced diets
have been associated with muscular dystrophy, metastatic calcification, difficulties with
pregnancy, vitamin deficiencies, and teeth problems.[72] Guinea pigs tend to be fickle eaters when
it comes to fresh fruits and vegetables, having learned early in life what is and is not
appropriate to consume, and their habits are difficult to change after maturity.[73] They do not
respond well to sudden changes in diet; they may stop eating and starve rather than accepting new
food types.[45] A constant supply of hay or other food is generally recommended, as guinea pigs
feed continuously and may develop habits such as chewing on their own hair if food is not
present.[74] Guinea pigs will also chew on cloth, paper, plastic, and rubber.

A number of plants are poisonous to guinea pigs, including bracken, bryony, buttercup, charlock,
deadly nightshade, foxglove, hellebore, hemlock, lily of the valley, mayweed, monkshood, privet,
ragwort, rhubarb, speedwell, toadflax and wild celery.[75] Additionally, any plant which grows
from a bulb (e.g., tulip and onion) is normally considered poisonous.[75]

Health
======

A guinea pig suffering from Torticollis, or wry neck.



Common ailments in domestic guinea pigs include respiratory infections, diarrhea, scurvy (vitamin
C deficiency, typically characterized by sluggishness), abscesses due to infection (often in the
neck, due to hay embedded in the throat, or from external scratches), and infections by lice,
mites or fungus.[76]

Mange mites (Trixacarus caviae) are a common cause of hair loss, whose symptoms may also include
excessive scratching, unusually aggressive behavior when touched (due to pain), and in some
instances, seizures.[77] Guinea pigs may also suffer from "running lice" (Gliricola porcelli), a
small white insect which can be seen moving through the hair. Other causes of hair loss can be due
to hormonal upsets caused by underlying medical conditions such as ovarian cysts.[78]

While it is normal for guinea pigs to sneeze periodically, frequent sneezing be a symptom of
pneumonia, especially in response to atmospheric changes. Pneumonia may also be accompanied by
torticollis and can be fatal.[79]

Because the guinea pig has a stout, compact body, the animal more easily tolerates excessive cold
than excessive heat. Its normal body temperature is 101-104?Â°F (38.5-40?Â°C),[80] and so its
ideal ambient air temperature range is similar to the human's, about 65-75?Â°F (18-24?Â°C).[81]
Consistent ambient temperatures in excess of 90?Â°F (32?Â°C) have been linked to hyperthermia and
death, especially among pregnant sows.[81]

Guinea pigs are prey animals whose survival instinct is to mask pain and signs of illness, and
many times health problems may not be apparent until a condition is severe or in its advanced
stages. Treatment of disease is made more difficult by the extreme sensitivity guinea pigs have to
most antibiotics, including penicillin, which kill off the intestinal flora and quickly bring on
episodes of diarrhea and death.[82]

Similar to the inherited genetic diseases of other breeds of animal (such as hip dysplasia in
canines), a number of genetic abnormalities of guinea pigs have been reported. Most commonly, the
roan coloration of Abyssinian guinea pigs is associated with congenital eye disorders and problems
with the digestive system.[83] Other genetic disorders include "waltzing disease" (deafness
coupled with a tendency to run in circles), palsy, and tremor conditions.[84]

Guinea pigs as pets
===================

A long-haired lilac, orange and white Satin Peruvian guinea pig.



Guinea pigs are widely considered to be good pets. If handled correctly early in their life, they
become very amenable to being picked up and carried, and seldom bite or scratch.[45] They are
timid explorers, and rarely attempt to escape from their cages, even when an opportunity presents
itself.[85] Guinea pigs who become familiar with their owner will whistle upon approach; they will
also learn to whistle in response to the rustling of plastic bags or the opening of refrigerator
doors, where their food is stored. Because of their widespread popularity in domestic life, and
especially because of their popularity in households with children, guinea pigs have often, in
recent years, been featured in popular culture.


        Main article: Guinea pigs in popular culture

Domesticated guinea pigs come in many breeds which have been developed since their arrival in
Europe and North America. These varieties vary widely in hair and color composition. The most
common varieties found in pet stores are the English shorthair (also known as the American), which
have a short, smooth coat, and the Abyssinian, whose coat is ruffled with cowlicks, or rosettes.
Also popular among breeders are the Peruvian and the Sheltie (or Silkie), both straight longhair
breeds, and the Texel, a curly longhair.


        Main article: Domestic varieties of guinea pigs

Cavy Clubs and Associations dedicated to the showing and breeding of guinea pigs have been
established worldwide. The American Cavy Breeders Association, an adjunct to the American Rabbit
Breeders Association, is the governing body in the United States and Canada.[86] The British Cavy
Council governs cavy clubs in England. Similar organizations exist in Australia (Australian
National Cavy Council)[87] and New Zealand (New Zealand Cavy Club).[88] Each club publishes its
own Standard of Perfection and determines which breeds are eligible for showing.

Guinea pigs in scientific research
==================================


The use of guinea pigs in scientific experimentation dates back at least to the seventeenth
century, when the Italian biologists Marcello Malpighi and Carlo Fracassati conducted vivisections
of guinea pigs in their examinations of anatomic structures.[89] In 1780, Antoine Lavoisier used a
guinea pig in his experiments with the calorimeter, a device used to measure heat production. The
heat from the guinea pig's respiration melted snow surrounding the calorimeter, showing that
respiratory gas exchange is a combustion, similar to a candle burning.[90] Guinea pigs played a
major role in the establishment of germ theory in the late nineteenth century, through the
experiments of Louis Pasteur, Ã‰mile Roux, and Robert Koch.[91]

In English, the term guinea pig is commonly used as a metaphor for a subject of scientific
experimentation. This dates back to the early twentieth century; the OED notes its first usage in
this capacity in 1913.[92] In 1933, Consumers' Research founders F. J. Schlink and Arthur Kallet
wrote a book entitled 100,000,000 Guinea Pigs, extending the metaphor to consumer society.[93] The
book became a national bestseller in the United States, thus further popularizing the term, and
spurred the growth of the consumer protection movement.[94]

Guinea pigs were popular laboratory animals until the later twentieth century; about 2.5 million
guinea pigs were used annually in the U.S. for research in the 1960s,[95] but that total decreased
to about 375,000 by the mid-1990s.[45] As of 2007, they constitute approximately 2% of the current
total of laboratory animals.[95] In the past they were widely used to standardize vaccines and
antiviral agents; they were also often employed in studies on the production of antibodies in
response to extreme allergic reactions, or anaphylaxis.[96] Less common uses included research in
pharmacology and irradiation.[96] Since the middle twentieth century, they have been replaced in
laboratory contexts primarily by mice and rats. This is in part because research into the genetics
of guinea pigs has lagged behind that of other rodents, although geneticists W. E. Castle and
Sewall Wright made a number of contributions to this area of study, especially regarding coat
color.[84][97] In 2004, the U.S.'s National Human Genome Research Institute announced plans to
sequence the genome of the domestic guinea pig.[98]

The guinea pig was most extensively implemented in research and diagnosis of infectious
diseases.[96] Common uses included identification of brucellosis, Chagas disease, cholera,
diphtheria, foot-and-mouth disease, glanders, Q fever, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and various
strains of typhus.[96] They are still frequently used to diagnose tuberculosis, since they are
easily infected by human tuberculosis bacteria.[95] Because guinea pigs are one of the few animals
which, like humans, cannot synthesize vitamin C but must obtain it from their diet, they are ideal
for researching scurvy.[95] Complement, an important component for serology, was first isolated
from the blood of the guinea pig.[95] Guinea pigs have an unusual insulin mutation,[99] and are a
suitable species for the generation of anti-insulin antibodies.[100] Present at a level 10 times
that found in other mammals, the insulin in guinea pigs may be important in growth regulation, a
role usually played by growth hormone.[101] Additionally, guinea pigs have been identified as
model organisms for the study of juvenile diabetes and, because of the frequency of pregnancy
toxemia, of preeclampsia in human females.[53]

Guinea pig strains used in scientific research are primarily outbred strains. Aside from the
common American or English stock, the two main outbred strains in laboratory use are the Hartley
and Dunkin-Hartley; these English strains are albino, although pigmented strains are also
available.[102] Inbred strains are less common and are usually used for very specific research,
such as immune system molecular biology. Of the inbred strains that have been created, the two
that are still used with any frequency are, following Sewall Wright's designations, "Strain 2" and
"Strain 13".[84][102]

Guinea pigs as food
===================

Guinea pigs being raised for consumption in Peru.



Guinea pigs (called cuy, cuye, curÃ­) were originally domesticated for their meat in the Andes.
Traditionally, the animal was reserved for ceremonial meals, but since the 1960s it has become
more of a staple food.[103] It continues to be a major part of the diet in Peru and Bolivia,
particularly in the Andes Mountains highlands; it is also eaten in some areas of Ecuador (mainly
in the Sierra) and Colombia.[104] Due to the fact that guinea pigs require much less room than
traditional livestock and reproduce extremely quickly, they are a more profitable source of food
and income than many traditional stock animals, such as pigs and cows;[105] moreover, they can be
raised in an urban environment. Both rural and urban families raise guinea pigs for supplementary
income, and the animals are commonly bought and sold at local markets and large-scale municipal
fairs.[106]

Guinea pig meat is high in protein and low in fat and cholesterol, and is described as being
similar to rabbit and the dark meat of chicken.[107][108] The animal may be served fried (chactado
or frito), broiled (asado), or roasted (al horno), and in urban restaurants may also be served in
a casserole or a fricassee.[109] Ecuadorians commonly consume sopa or locro de cuy, a soup
dish.[109] Pachamanca or huatia, a process similar to barbecueing, is also popular, and is usually
served with corn beer (chicha) in traditional settings.[109]

Peruvians consume an estimated 65 million guinea pigs each year, and the animal is so entrenched
in the culture that one famous painting of the Last Supper in the main cathedral in Cusco, Peru
shows Christ and the twelve disciples dining on guinea pig.[107] The animal remains an important
aspect of certain religious events in both rural and urban areas of Peru. A religious celebration
known as jaca tsariy ("collecting the cuys") is a major festival in many villages in the Antonio
Raimondi province of eastern Peru, and is celebrated in smaller ceremonies in Lima.[110] It is a
syncretistic event, combining elements of Catholicism and pre-Columbian religious practices, and
revolves around the celebration of local patron saints.[110] The exact form that the jaca tsariy
takes differs from town to town; in some localities, a sirvinti (servant) is appointed to go from
door to door, collecting donations of guinea pigs, while in others, guinea pigs may be brought to
a communal area to be released in a mock bullfight.[110] Meals such as cuy chactado are always
served as part of these festivities, and the killing and serving of the animal is framed by some
communities as a symbolic satire of local politicians or important figures.[110] In the Tungurahua
and Cotopaxi provinces of central Ecuador, guinea pigs are employed in the celebrations
surrounding the feast of Corpus Christi as part of the Ensayo, which is a community meal, and the
Octava, where castillos (greased poles) are erected with prizes tied to the crossbars, from which
several guinea pigs may be hung.[111]

Andean immigrants in New York City raise and sell guinea pigs for meat, and some ethnic
restaurants in major United States cities serve it as a delicacy.[112] Peruvian research
universities, especially La Molina National Agrarian University, began experimental programs in
the 1960s with the intention of breeding larger-sized guinea pigs.[113] Subsequent university
efforts have sought to change breeding and husbandry procedures in South America, so as to make
the raising of guinea pigs as livestock more economically sustainable.[114] In the 1990s and
2000s, the university began exporting the larger breed guinea pigs to Europe, Japan, and the
United States in the hope of increasing human consumption outside of South America.[107] Efforts
have also been made to introduce guinea pig husbandry in developing countries in West Africa.[105]

