Insect
======

Carboniferous



Western honey bee (Order Hymenoptera)



Kingdom: Animalia

Phylum: Arthropoda

Subphylum: Hexapoda

Class: Insecta
Linnaeus, 1758

See taxonomy


Insects (Class Insecta) are a major group of arthropods and the most diverse group of animals on
the Earth, with over a million described species—more than all other animal groups combined.[1]
Insects may be found in nearly all environments on the planet, although only a small number of
species occur in the oceans where crustaceans tend to predominate instead.

There are approximately 5,000 dragonfly species, 2,000 praying mantis, 20,000 grasshopper, 170,000
butterfly and moth, 120,000 fly, 82,000 true bug, 360,000 beetle, and 110,000 bee, wasp and ant
species described to date. Estimates of the total number of current species, including those not
yet known to science, range from two million to fifty million, with newer studies favouring a
lower figure of about six to ten million.[1][2][3] Adult modern insects range in size from a
0.139?mm Mymarid wasp (Dicopomorpha echmepterygis) to a 55.5?cm long Stick insect (Phobaeticus
serratipes).[4] The heaviest documented insect is a Giant Weta (at 70 grams), but other possible
candidates include the Goliath beetles Goliathus goliatus, Goliathus regius and Cerambycid beetles
such as Titanus giganteus, though no one is certain which is truly the heaviest.[4]

The study of insects (from Latin insectus, meaning "cut into sections") is called entomology, from
the Greek εντομος, also meaning "cut into sections".[5]

Contents
========



* Roles in the environment and human society
* Morphology
  o Nervous system
  o Exoskeleton

* Development
* Behavior
  o Sociality
  o Light production and vision
  o Sound production and hearing
  o Chemical communication

* Locomotion
  o Flight
  o Walking
  o Swimming

* Evolution
  o Coevolution

* Taxonomy
* Relationship to other arthropods
* Quotations
* Gallery
* References
* See also
* For further reading
* External links
  o Image resources

 Roles in the environment and human society
=================================================

Aedes aegypti, a parasite, and vector of dengue fever and yellow fever



Many insects are considered pests by humans. Insects commonly regarded as pests include those that
are parasitic (mosquitoes, lice, bedbugs), transmit diseases (mosquitoes, flies), damage
structures (termites), or destroy agricultural goods (locusts, weevils). Many entomologists are
involved in various forms of pest control, often using insecticides, but more and more relying on
methods of biocontrol.

Although pest insects attract the most attention, many insects are beneficial to the environment
and to humans. Some pollinate flowering plants (for example wasps, bees, butterflies, ants).
Pollination is a trade between plants that need to reproduce, and pollinators that receive rewards
of nectar and pollen. A serious environmental problem today is the decline of populations of
pollinator insects, and a number of species of insects are now cultured primarily for pollination
management in order to have sufficient pollinators in the field, orchard or greenhouse at bloom
time.

Insects also produce useful substances such as honey, wax, lacquer and silk. Honey bees have been
cultured by humans for thousands of years for honey, although contracting for crop pollination is
becoming more significant for beekeepers. The silkworm has greatly affected human history, as
silk-driven trade established relationships between China and the rest of the world. Fly larvae
(maggots) were formerly used to treat wounds to prevent or stop gangrene, as they would only
consume dead flesh. This treatment is finding modern usage in some hospitals. Adult insects such
as crickets, and insect larvae of various kinds are also commonly used as fishing bait.

Chorthippus biguttatus, a grasshopper



In some parts of the world, insects are used for human food ("Entomophagy"), while being a taboo
in other places. There are proponents of developing this use to provide a major source of protein
in human nutrition. Since it is impossible to entirely eliminate pest insects from the human food
chain, insects already are present in many foods, especially grains. Most people do not realize
that food laws in many countries do not prohibit insect parts in food, but rather limit the
quantity. According to cultural materialist anthropologist Marvin Harris, the eating of insects is
taboo in cultures that have protein sources that require less work, like farm birds or cattle.

Many insects, especially beetles, are scavengers, feeding on dead animals and fallen trees,
recycling the biological materials into forms found useful by other organisms, and insects are
responsible for much of the process by which topsoil is created. The ancient Egyptian religion
adored beetles and represented them as scarabeums.

Although mostly unnoticed by most humans, the most useful of all insects are insectivores, those
that feed on other insects. Many insects, such as grasshoppers, can potentially reproduce so
quickly that they could literally bury the earth in a single season. However, there are hundreds
of other insect species that feed on grasshopper eggs, and some that feed on grasshopper adults.
This role in ecology is usually assumed to be primarily one of birds, but insects, though less
glamorous, are much more significant. For any pest insect one can name, there is a species of wasp
that is either a parasitoid or predator upon that pest, and plays a significant role in
controlling it.

Human attempts to control pests by insecticides can backfire, because important but unrecognized
insects already helping to control pest populations are also killed by the poison, leading
eventually to population explosions of the pest species.

 Morphology
=================

Insect anatomy
A- Head ? B- Thorax ? C- Abdomen
1. antenna
2. ocelli (lower)
3. ocelli (upper)
4. compound eye
5. brain (cerebral ganglia)
6. prothorax
7. dorsal artery
8. tracheal tubes (trunk with spiracle)
9. mesothorax
10. metathorax
11. forewing
12. hindwing
13. mid-gut (stomach)
14. heart
15. ovary
16. hind-gut (intestine, rectum & anus)
17. anus
18. vagina
19. nerve chord (abdominal ganglia)
20. Malpighian tubes
21. pillow
22. claws
23. tarsus
24. tibia
25. femur
26. trochanter
27. fore-gut (crop, gizzard)
28. thoracic ganglion
29. coxa
30. salivary gland
31. subesophageal ganglion
32. mouthparts

Insects possess segmented bodies supported by an exoskeleton, a hard outer covering made mostly of
chitin. The body is divided into a head, a thorax, and an abdomen. The head supports a pair of
sensory antennae, a pair of compound eyes, and mouth parts. The thorax has six legs (one pair per
segment) and wings (if present in the species). The abdomen (made up of eleven segments some of
which may be reduced or fused) has respiratory, excretory and reproductive structures.

 Nervous system
=====================


Their nervous system can be divided into a brain and a ventral nerve cord. The head capsule (made
up of six fused segments) has six pairs of ganglia. The first three pairs are fused into the
brain, while the three following pairs are fused into a structure called the subesophageal
ganglion.

The thoracic segments have one ganglion on each side, which are connected into a pair, one pair
per segment. This arrangement is also seen in the abdomen but only in the first eight segments.
Many species of insects have reduced numbers of ganglia due to fusion or reduction. Some
cockroaches have just six ganglia in the abdomen, whereas the wasp Vespa crabro has only two in
the thorax and three in the abdomen. And some like the house fly Musca domestica have fused all
the body ganglia into a single large thoracic ganglion.

 Exoskeleton
==================


Most insects have two pairs of wings located on the second and third thoracic segments. Insects
are the only invertebrates to have developed flight, and this has played an important part in
their success. The winged insects, and their wingless relatives, make up the subclass Pterygota.
Insect flight is not very well understood, relying heavily on turbulent aerodynamic effects. The
primitive insect groups use muscles that act directly on the wing structure. The more advanced
groups making up the Neoptera have foldable wings and their muscles act on the thorax wall and
power the wings indirectly. These muscles are able to contract multiple times for each single
nerve impulse, allowing the wings to beat faster than would ordinarily be possible (see insect
flight).

Their outer skeleton, the cuticle, is made up of two layers; the epicuticle which is a thin and
waxy water resistant outer layer and contains no chitin, and another layer under it called the
procuticle. This is chitinous and much thicker than the epicuticle and has two layers. The outer
being the exocuticle while the inner is the endocuticle. The tough and flexible endocuticle is
built from numerous layers of fibrous chitin and proteins, criss-crossing each others in a
sandwich pattern, while the exocuticle is rigid and sclerotized.

 Development
==================

Hoverflies mating in flight



Most insects hatch from eggs, but others are ovoviviparous or viviparous, and all undergo a series
of moults as they develop and grow in size. This manner of growth is necessitated by the inelastic
exoskeleton. Moulting is a process by which the individual escapes the confines of the exoskeleton
in order to increase in size, then grows a new and larger outer covering. In some insects, the
young are called nymphs and are similar in form to the adults except that the wings are not
developed until the adult stage. This is called incomplete metamorphosis and insects showing this
are termed hemimetabolous. Holometabolous insects show complete metamorphosis, which distinguishes
the Endopterygota and includes many of the most successful insect groups. In these species, an egg
hatches to produce a larva, which is generally worm-like in form, and can be divided into five
different forms; eruciform (caterpillar-like), scarabaeiform (grublike), campodeiform (elongated,
flattened, and active), elateriform (wireworm-like) and vermiform (maggot-like). The larva grows
and eventually becomes a pupa, a stage sealed within a cocoon in some species. There are three
types of pupae; obtect (the pupa is compact with the legs and other appendages enclosed), exarate
(where the pupa has the legs and other appendages free and extended) and coarctate (where the pupa
develops inside the larval skin). In the pupal stage, the insect undergoes considerable change in
form to emerge as an adult, or imago. Butterflies are an example of an insect that undergoes
complete metamorphosis. Some insects have even evolved hypermetamorphosis.

Some insects (parastic wasps) show polyembryony where a single fertilized egg can divide into many
and in some cases thousands of separate embryos. Other developmental and reproductive variations
include haplodiploidy, polymorphism, paedomorphosis (metathetely and prothetely), sexual
dimorphism, parthenogenesis and more rarely hermaphroditism.

 Behavior
===============

Flies attracted to an incandescent light bulb



Many insects possess very sensitive and/or specialized organs of perception. Some insects such as
bees can perceive ultraviolet wavelengths, or detect polarized light, while the antennae of male
moths can detect the pheromones of female moths over distances of many kilometers. There is a
pronounced tendency for there to be a trade-off between visual acuity and chemical or tactile
acuity, such that most insects with well-developed eyes have reduced or simple antennae, and
vice-versa. There is a variety of different mechanisms by which insects perceive sound, and it is
by no means universal; the general pattern, however, is that if an insect can produce sound, then
it can also hear sound, though the range of frequencies they can hear is often quite narrow (and
may in fact be limited to only the frequency that they themselves produce). Some nocturnal moths
can perceive the ultrasonic emissions of bats, a mechanism which helps them avoid predation.
Certain predatory and parasitic insects can detect the characteristic sounds made by their
prey/hosts. Bloodsucking insects have special sensory structures that can detect infrared
emissions, and use them to home in on their hosts.

Sensillae: sensory structures on insects



Most insects lead short lives as adults, and rarely interact with one another except to mate, or
compete for mates. A small number exhibit some form of parental care, where they will at least
guard their eggs, and sometimes continue guarding their offspring until adulthood, and possible
even actively feeding them. Another simple form of parental care is to construct a nest (a burrow
or an actual construction, either of which may be simple or complex), store provisions in it, and
lay an egg upon those provisions. The adult does not contact the growing offspring, but it
nonetheless does provide food. This sort of care is typical of bees and various types of wasps.

A few such insects also have a well-developed number sense, among the solitary wasps that
provision with a single species of prey. The mother wasp lays her eggs in individual cells and
provides each egg with a number of live caterpillars on which the young feed when hatched. Some
species of wasp always provide five, others twelve, and others as high as twenty-four caterpillars
per cell. The number of caterpillars is different among species, but it is always the same for
each sex of larvae. The male solitary wasp in the genus Eumenes is smaller than the female, so the
mother of one species supplies him with only five caterpillars; the larger female receives ten
caterpillars in her cell. She can in other words distinguish between both the numbers five and ten
in the caterpillars she is providing and which cell contains a male or a female.

 Sociality
================

A termite mound made by the cathedral termite



Social insects, such as the termites, ants and many bees and wasps, are the most familiar species
of eusocial animal. They live together in large well-organized colonies that may be so tightly
integrated and genetically similar that the colonies of some species are sometimes considered
superorganisms. It is sometimes argued that the various species of honey bee are the only
invertebrates (and indeed one of the few non-human groups) to have evolved a system of abstract
symbolic communication (i.e., where a behavior is used to represent and convey specific
information about something in the environment), called the "dance language" - the angle at which
a bee dances represents a direction relative to the sun, and the length of the dance represents
the distance to be flown.

Only those insects which live in nests or colonies demonstrate any true capacity for fine-scale
spatial orientation or "homing" - this can be quite sophisticated, however, and allow an insect to
return unerringly to a single hole a few millimeters in diameter among a mass of thousands of
apparently identical holes all clustered together, after a trip of up to several kilometers'
distance, and (in cases where an insect hibernates) as long as a year after last viewing the area
(a phenomenon known as philopatry). A few insects migrate, but this is a larger-scale form of
navigation, and often involves only large, general regions (e.g., the overwintering areas of the
Monarch butterfly).

 Light production and vision
==================================


A few insects, notably the beetles of the family Lampyridae have evolved light generating organs.
They are also able to control this light generation to produce flashes and some species use the
light to attract mates.

Most insects except some species of cave dwelling crickets are able to perceive light and dark.
Many species have acute vision capable of detecting minute movements. The eyes include simple eyes
or ocelli as well as compound eyes of varying sizes. Many species are able to detect light in the
infrared, ultraviolet as well as the visible light wavelengths. Colour vision has been
demonstrated in many species.

 Sound production and hearing
===================================


Insects were the earliest organisms to produce sounds and to sense them. Soundmaking in insects is
achieved mostly by mechanical action of appendages. In the grasshoppers and crickets this is
achieved by stridulation. The cicadas have the loudest sounds among the insects and have special
modifications to their body and musculature to produce and amplify sounds. Some species such as
the African cicada, Brevisana brevis have been measured at 106.7 decibels at a distance of 50
cm.[4] Some insects can hear ultrasound and take evasive action when they sense detection by bats.
Some moths produce clicks and these were earlier thought to have a role in jamming the bat
echolocation. However studies suggest that these are produced mostly by unpalatable moths to warn
the bats, just as warning colouration is used visually.[6]

Very low sounds are also produced in various species of Lepidoptera, Coleoptera and Hymenoptera,
mostly through the use of wing movement or friction at the joints of appendages.

Most soundmaking insects also have tympanal organs that can perceive airborne sounds. Most insects
are also able to sense vibrations transmitted by the substrate.

 Chemical communication
=============================


In addition to the use of sound for communication, a wide range of insects have evolved chemical
means for communication. These chemicals, termed semiochemicals, are often derived from plant
metabolites include those meant to attract, repel and provide other kinds of information. While
some chemicals are targeted at individuals of the same species, others are used for communication
across species. The use of scents is especially well known developed in the social insects.

 Locomotion
=================

 Flight
=============



        Main article: insect flight

Insects are the only group of invertebrates to have developed flight. The evolution of insect
wings has been the subject of debate. Some proponents suggest that the wings are para-notal in
origin while others have suggested that these are modified gills. In the Carboniferous age, some
of the Meganeura dragonflies had as much as a 50cms wide wingspan. The largest flying insects
today are much smaller and include several moth species such as the Atlas moth and the White Witch
(Thysania agrippina).

Insect flight has been a topic of great interest in aerodynamics due partly to the inability of
steady-state theories to explain the lift generated by the tiny wings of insects.

 Walking
==============


Many adult insects use six legs for walking and have adopted a tripedal gait. The tripedal gait
allows for rapid walking whilst always having a stable stance and has been studied extensively in
cockroaches. The legs are used in alternate triangles touching the ground. For the first step the
middle right leg and the front and rear left legs are in contact with the ground and move the
insect forward, whilst the front and rear right leg and the middle left leg are lifted and moved
forward to a new position. When they touch the ground to form a new stable triangle the other legs
can be lifted and brought forward in turn and so on.

The purest form of the tripedal gait is seen in insects moving at speed and is illustrated in the
gif animation of a 7-spot ladybird (Coccinellidae, Coccinella septempunctata). However, this type
of locomotion is not rigid and insects can adapt a variety of gaits; for example, when moving
slowly, turning, or avoiding obstacles, four or more feet may be touching the ground. Insects can
also adapt their gait to cope with the loss of one or more limbs.

Cockroaches are amongst the fastest insect runners and at full speed actually adopt a bipedal run
to reach a high velocity in proportion to their body size. As Cockroaches move extremely rapidly,
they need recording at several hundred frames per second to reveal their gait. More sedate
locomotion is also studied by scientists in stick insects Phasmatodea.

A few insects have evolved to walk on the surface of the water, especially the bugs of the family,
Gerridae, also known as water striders. A few species in the genus Halobates even live on the
surface of open oceans, a habitat that has few insect species.

Insect walking is of particular interest as an alternative form of locomotion to the use of wheels
for robots (Robot locomotion).

 Swimming
===============

The backswimmer Notonecta glauca underwater, showing the paddle like hindleg adaptation



A large number of insects live either a part or their whole lives underwater. In many orders the
immature stages are spent in water while the adults are either aerial or terrestrial in habit. A
few species spend a part of their adult life either under or over water. Many of these species
have adaptations to help in locomotion under water. The water beetles and water bugs have legs
adapted into paddle like structures. Some Odonate larvae, such as dragonfly naiads, propel
themselves rapidly by expelling water forcibly out of the rectal chamber.

 Evolution
================

Evolution has produced astonishing variety in insects. Pictured are some of the possible shapes of
antennae.

        Main article: Insect evolution

The relationships of insects to other animal groups remain unclear. Although more traditionally
grouped with millipedes and centipedes, evidence has emerged favoring closer evolutionary ties
with the crustaceans. In the Pancrustacea theory insects, together with Remipedia and
Malacostraca, make up a natural clade.

Apart from some tantalizing Devonian fragments, insects first appear suddenly in the fossil record
at the very beginning of the Late Carboniferous period, Early Bashkirian age, about 350 million
years ago. Insect species were already diverse and highly specialized by this time, with fossil
evidence reflecting the presence of more than half a dozen different orders. Thus, the first
insects probably emerged earlier in the Carboniferous period, or even in the preceding Devonian.
The oldest insect traces are found in amber from Lebanon representing the Lower Cretaceous (120
mya). Research to discover these earliest insect ancestors in the fossil record continues.

The origins of insect flight remain obscure, since the earliest winged insects currently known
appear to have been capable fliers. Some extinct insects had an additional pair of winglets
attaching to the first segment of the thorax, for a total of three pairs. So far, there is nothing
that suggests that the insects were a particularly successful group of animals before they got
their wings.

Late Carboniferous and Early Permian insect orders include both several current very long-lived
groups and a number of Paleozoic forms. During this era, some giant dragonfly-like forms reached
wingspans of 55 to 70?cm, making them far larger than any living insect. Also their nymphs must
have had a very impressive size. This gigantism may have been due to higher atmospheric oxygen
levels that allowed increased respiratory efficiency relative to today. The lack of flying
vertebrates could have been another factor.

Most extant orders of insects developed during the Permian era that began around 270 million years
ago. Many of the early groups became extinct during the Permian-Triassic extinction event, the
largest mass extinction in the history of the Earth, around 252 million years ago.

The remarkably successful Hymenopterans appeared in the Cretaceous but achieved their diversity
more recently, in the Cenozoic. A number of highly-successful insect groups evolved in conjunction
with flowering plants, a powerful illustration of co-evolution.

Many modern insect genera developed during the Cenozoic; insects from this period on are often
found preserved in amber, often in perfect condition. Such specimens are easily compared with
modern species. The study of fossilized insects is called paleoentomology.

 Coevolution
==================



        Main article: Coevolution

Insects were among the earliest terrestrial herbivores and they acted as major selection agents on
plants. Plants evolved chemical defenses against this herbivory and the insects in turn evolved
mechanisms to deal with plant toxins. Many insects make use of these toxins to protect themselves
from their predators. And such insects advertise their toxicity using warning colours. This
successful evolutionary pattern has also been utilized by mimics. Over time, this has led to
complex groups of co-evolved species. Conversely, some interactions between plants and insects are
beneficial (see pollination), and coevolution has led to the development of very specific
mutualisms in such systems.

 Taxonomy
===============

A Syrphid fly on a Grape hyacinth

Orthetrum caledonicum, the Blue Skimmer dragonfly



This is a list of the orders and higher taxa of insects.

Within the subphylum Hexapoda, a few groups such as springtails (Collembola), are often treated as
insects; however some authors treat them as distinct from the insects in having a different
evolutionary origin. This may also be the case for the rest of the members of the Entognatha;
Protura and Diplura.

The true insects, those of the Class Insecta, are distinguished from all other arthropods in part
by having ectognathous, or exposed, mouthparts and eleven abdominal segments. The true insects are
therefore sometimes also referred to as the Ectognatha. Many insect groups are winged as adults.
The exopterygote part of the Neoptera are sometimes divided into Orthopteroida (cerci present) and
Hemipteroida (cerci absent), also called lower and higher Exopterygota; a full classification is
given below.

Subclass Apterygota


        * Archaeognatha (bristletails)
        * Thysanura (silverfish)
        * Monura - extinct

Subclass Pterygota


        * Infraclass Paleoptera (may be paraphyletic)


        * Ephemeroptera (mayflies)
        * Palaeodictyoptera - extinct
        * Megasecoptera - extinct
        * Archodonata - extinct
        * Diaphanopterodea - extinct
        * Protodonata - extinct
        * Odonata (dragonflies and damselflies)

* Infraclass Neoptera

        Superorder Exopterygota
        * Caloneurodea - extinct
        * Titanoptera - extinct
        * Protorthoptera - extinct
        * Grylloblattodea (ice-crawlers)
        * Mantophasmatodea (gladiators)
        * Plecoptera (stoneflies)
        * Embioptera (webspinners)
        * Zoraptera (angel insects)
        * Dermaptera (earwigs)
        * Orthoptera (grasshoppers, etc)
        * Phasmatodea (stick insects)
        * Blattodea (cockroaches)
        * Isoptera (termites)
        * Mantodea (mantids)
        * Psocoptera (booklice, barklice)
        * Thysanoptera (thrips)
        * Phthiraptera (lice)
        * Hemiptera (true bugs)

        Superorder Endopterygota
        * Hymenoptera (ants, bees, etc.)
        * Coleoptera (beetles)
        * Strepsiptera (twisted-winged parasites)
        * Raphidioptera (snakeflies)
        * Megaloptera (alderflies, etc.)
        * Neuroptera (net-veined insects)
        * Mecoptera (scorpionflies, etc.)
        * Siphonaptera (fleas)
        * Diptera (true flies)
        * Protodiptera extinct

        Superorder Amphiesmenoptera
        * Trichoptera (caddisflies)
        * Lepidoptera (butterflies, moths)

        Incertae sedis
        * Glosselytrodea extinct
        * Miomoptera extinct

As seen above, insects are divided into two subclasses; Apterygota and Pterygota (flying insects),
but this could relatively soon change. Apterygota is made up of two orders; Archaeognatha
(bristletails) and Thysanura (silverfish). In the suggested classification, the Archaeognatha
makes up the Monocondylia while Thysanura and Pterygota are grouped together as Dicondylia. It is
even possible that the Thysanura itself are not monophyletic, making the family Lepidotrichidae a
sister group to the Dicondylia (Pterygota + the rest of the Thysanura).

Also within the infraclass Neoptera we will probably see some re-organization in not too long.
Today Neoptera is divided into the superorders Exopterygota and Endopterygota. But even if the
Endopterygota are monophyletic, the Exopterygota seems to be paraphyletic, and can be separated
into smaller groups; Paraneoptera, Dictyoptera, Orthopteroidea and to other groups
(Grylloblattodea + Mantophasmatodea and Plecoptera + Zoraptera + Dermaptera). Phasmatodea and
Embioptera has been suggested to form Eukinolabia, while Strepsiptera and Diptera are sometimes
grouped together in Halteria. Paraneoptera has turned out to be more closeley related to
Endopterygota than to the rest of the Exopterygota. It is not still clear how closely related the
remaining Exopterygote groups are and if they belongs together in a larger unit. Only more
research will give the answer.

 Relationship to other arthropods
=======================================

Spiders such as this wolf spider are not insects



Other terrestrial arthropods, such as centipedes, millipedes, scorpions and spiders, are sometimes
confused with insects since their body plans can appear similar, sharing (as do all arthropods) a
jointed exoskeleton. However upon closer examination their features differ significantly; most
noticeably they do not have the six legs characteristic of adult insects.

The higher level phylogeny of the arthropods continues to be a matter of debate and research. A
proposed phylogenetic tree of the arthropods and related groups is given in the tree below. This
tree does not take into consideration many extinct groups.[7]


 

 

 

Hexapoda (Insecta, collembola, diplura, protura)

 

Crustacea (crabs, shrimp, isopods)

Myriapoda 

 

Pauropoda

 

Diplopoda (Millipedes)

 

Chilopoda (Centipedes)

 

Symphyla

Chelicerata 

 

Arachnida (Spiders, scorpions and allies)

 

Eurypterida (Sea scorpions: Extinct)

 

Xiphosura (King crabs)

 

Pycnogonida (Sea spiders)

 

Trilobites (Extinct)

 Quotations
=================


* "Something in the insect seems to be alien to the habits, morals, and psychology of this
  world, as if it had come from some other planet: more monstrous, more energetic, more insensate,
  more atrocious, more infernal than our own."


        —Maurice Maeterlinck (1862–1949)
* When asked what can be learned about the Creator by examining His work, J.B.S. Haldane said
  "an inordinate fondness for beetles."

* "To understand the success of insects is to appreciate our own shortcomings" —Thomas Eisner

 Gallery
==============

Beautiful Demoiselle (Calopteryx virgo)

 

Common earwig (Forficula auricularia)

 

A juvenile Patanga japonica

 

A stick insect (Ctenomorpha chronus)

Termite alates

 

Water strider (Gerris najas)

 

Bishop's mitre shield bug (Aelia acuminata)

 

Ant

Red mason bee (Osmia rufa)

 

A wasp drinking

 

Aleiodes indiscretus parasitising a gypsy moth (Lymantria dispar) larva

 

Adult citrus root weevil (Diaprepes abbreviatus)

A flower fly, Episyrphus balteatus

 

Scarce swallowtail (Iphiclides podalirius)

 

Giant Leopard Moth (Ecpantheria scribonia)

 

Rosy maple moth (Dryocampa rubicunda)

* Flesh fly (file info)?— Watch in browser
  o Video of a flesh fly cleaning itself

* Problems seeing the videos? See media help.

