Gray Wolf
=========

(Redirected from Wolf)



â€œWolfâ€? redirects here. Wolf

â€œGray Wolvesâ€? redirects here. For other uses, see Gray Wolves (disambiguation).

Least Concern [1]



Kingdom: Animalia

Phylum: Chordata

Class: Mammalia

Order: Carnivora

Family: Canidae

Genus: Canis

Species: C. lupus



Binomial name

Canis lupus
Linnaeus, 1758


Range map


The Gray Wolf (Canis lupus; also spelled Grey Wolf, see spelling differences; also known as Timber
Wolf or Wolf) is a mammal in the order Carnivora. The Gray Wolf shares a common ancestry with the
domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris), as evidenced by DNA sequencing and genetic drift
studies.[2] Gray wolves were once abundant and distributed over much of North America, Eurasia,
and the Middle East. Today, for a variety of human-related reasons, including widespread habitat
destruction and excessive hunting, wolves inhabit only a very limited portion of their former
range. Though listed as a species of least concern for extinction worldwide, for some regions
including the Continental United States, the species is listed as endangered or threatened.[3]

The Gray Wolf, being a keystone predator, is an important part of the ecosystems to which it
typically belongs. The wide range of habitats where wolves thrive reflects their adaptability as a
species, and includes temperate forests, mountains, tundra, taiga, and grasslands. In much of the
world, with the exception of Northern regions, they are listed as endangered. They continue to be
hunted in many areas of the world for their perceived threat to livestock, as well as for sport.

Contents
========



* Anatomy, physiology, and reproduction
  o Features and adaptations
  o Courtship and mating
  o Breeding and life cycle

* Behavior
  o Body language
  o Howling
  o Other vocalizations
  o Scent marking

* Social structure and hunting
  o The pack
  o Hierarchy
  o Cooperative hunting and diet
  o Relationships with other predators

* Historical perceptions
* Reintroduction
* Wolf hunting
  o Livestock predation
  o Trapping and breeding for fur

* Taxonomy
  o Classification and relation to the dog
  o Subspecies of the wolf

* Media
* See also
* References
* External links
* Gallery

 Anatomy, physiology, and reproduction
============================================

 Features and adaptations
===============================


The weight and size of the Gray Wolf can vary greatly worldwide, and tend to increase
proportionally with latitude. Generally speaking, height varies from 0.6â€“0.9 meters (26â€“34
inches) at the shoulder, and weight from 32â€“62 kilograms (70â€“135 pounds), which together make
Gray Wolves the largest of all wild canids.[4] Although rarely encountered, extreme specimens of
more than 77 kg (170 lb) have been recorded in Alaska and Canada;[5] the heaviest wild wolf on
record, which was killed in Alaska in 1939, was 80 kg (175 lb).[6] There are some unconfirmed
reports of wolves hunted in North Eastern Russia reaching weights of 100 kg. (220 lb).[7] The
smallest wolves come from the Arabian Wolf subspecies, the females of which may weigh as little as
10 kg (22 lb) at maturity. Females in a given population typically weigh about 20% less than their
male counterparts.[8] Wolves can measure anywhere from 1.3â€“2 meters (4.5â€“6.5 feet) from nose
to the tip of the tail, which itself accounts for approximately one quarter of overall body
length.[9] .

Wolves are built for stamina, possessing features ideal for long-distance travel. Their narrow
chests and powerful backs and legs facilitate efficient locomotion. They are capable of covering
several miles trotting at about a pace of 10 km/h (6 mph), and have been known to reach speeds
approaching 65 km/h (40 mph) during a chase.[10] While thus sprinting, wolves can cover up to 5
meters (16 ft) per bound.[11]

Wolves usually have blended pelages.



Wolf paws are able to tread easily on a wide variety of terrains, especially snow. There is a
slight webbing between each toe, which allows wolves to move over snow more easily than
comparatively hampered prey. Wolves are digitigrade, which, with the relative largeness of their
feet, helps them to distribute their weight well on snowy surfaces. The front paws are larger than
the hind paws, and have a fifth digit, a dewclaw, that is absent on hind paws. Bristled hairs and
blunt claws enhance grip on slippery surfaces, and special blood vessels keep paw pads from
freezing.[12] Scent glands located between a wolf's toes leave trace chemical markers behind,
helping the wolf to effectively navigate over large expanses while concurrently keeping others
informed of its whereabouts.[12]

A wolf sometimes seems heavier than it actually is due to its bulky coat, which is made of two
layers. The first layer consists of tough guard hairs designed to repel water and dirt. The second
is a dense, water-resistant undercoat that insulates the wolf. Wolves have distinct winter and
summer pelages that alternate in spring and autumn. Females tend to keep their winter coats
further into the spring than males.

Coloration varies greatly: it runs from gray to gray-brown, all the way through the canine
spectrum of white, red, brown, and black. These colors tend to mix in many populations to form
predominantly blended individuals, though it is certainly not uncommon for an individual or an
entire population to be entirely one color (usually all black or all white). A multicolor coat
characteristically lacks any clear pattern other than it tends to be lighter on the animal's
underside. Fur color sometimes corresponds with a given wolf population's environment; for
example, all-white wolves are much more common in areas with perennial snow cover. Aging wolves
acquire a grayish tint in their coats.

Adolescent wolf with golden-yellow eyes.



At birth, wolf pups tend to have darker fur and blue eyes that will change to a yellow-gold or
orange color when the pups are 8â€“16 weeks old.[13] Though extremely unusual, it is possible for
an adult wolf to retain its blue-colored eyes.[14]

Wolves' long, powerful muzzles help distinguish them from coyotes, which have more narrow, pointed
muzzles; and from dogs, which generally have shorter muzzles. Wolves also differ in certain skull
dimensions, having a smaller orbital angle, for example, than dogs (&gt;53 degrees for dogs
compared to <45 degrees for wolves) and a comparatively larger cerebral capacity.[15] Larger paw
size, yellow eyes, longer legs, and bigger teeth further distinguish adult wolves from other
canids, particularly dogs. Also, precaudal glands at the base of the tail are present in wolves
but not in dogs.

Wolves and most larger dogs share identical dentition; the maxilla has six incisors, two canines,
eight premolars, and four molars. The mandible has six incisors, two canines, eight premolars, and
six molars.[16] The fourth upper premolars and first lower molars constitute the carnassial teeth,
which are essential tools for shearing flesh. The long canine teeth are also important, in that
they are designed to hold and subdue the prey. Powered by 1500 lb/sq. inch (~10 MPa) of pressure,
a wolf's teeth are its main weapons as well as its primary tools.[6] Therefore, any injury to the
jaw line or teeth could devastate a wolf, dooming it to starvation or incapacity.

 Courtship and mating
===========================


Usually, the instinct to reproduce drives young wolves away from their birth packs, leading them
to seek out mates and territories of their own. Dispersals occur at all times during the year,
typically of wolves who have reached sexual maturity in the previous breeding season. It takes two
such dispersals from two packs for the process to take place, for dispersing wolves from the same
maternal pack tend not to mate.[17] Once two dispersing wolves meet and begin traveling together,
they immediately begin the process of seeking out territory, preferably in time for the next
mating season. The bond that forms between these wolves often lasts until one of them dies â€”
with few exceptions.[18]

During the mating season, breeding wolves become very affectionate with one another in
anticipation of the female's ovulation cycle. Overall, pack tension rises as each mature wolf
feels urged to mate. In fact, during this time, the alpha male and alpha female may be forced to
aggressively prevent other wolves from mating with one other.[17] Under normal circumstances, a
pack can only support one litter per year; so the dominance of the alpha wolves is beneficial in
the long run.[specify][17]

When the alpha female goes into estrusâ€”which occurs once per year and lasts 5â€“14
days,[19]â€”she and her mate will spend an increased amount of time in seclusion. Pheromones in
the female's urine and the swelling of her vulva make it known to the male that the female is in
heat. The female is unreceptive for the first few days of estrus, during which time she sheds the
lining of her uterus; but when she begins ovulating, the two wolves mate.

The male wolf will mount the female firmly from behind. After achieving coitus, the two form a
copulatory tie once the male's bulbus glandisâ€” an erectile tissue located near the base of the
canine penisâ€” swells and the female's vaginal muscles tighten. Ejaculation is induced by the
thrusting of the male's pelvis and the undulation of the female's cervix. The two become
physically inseparable for anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes, during which the male will ejaculate
multiple times.[20][21] After the initial ejaculation, the male may lift one of his legs over the
female such that they are standing end-to-end; this is believed to be a defensive measure.[21] The
mating ritual is repeated many times throughout the female's brief ovulation period, which occurs
once per year per female â€” unlike female dogs, whose estrus usually occurs twice per year.

 Breeding and life cycle
==============================

A wolf pup looks up to others in the pack for protection.



Normally, only the alpha pair of the pack breeds (this is a kind of organization also found in
other pack-hunting canids, including the Dhole and the African Hunting Dog). Mating occurs between
January and April â€” the higher the latitude, the later it occurs.[18] A pack usually produces a
single litter, unless the alpha male mates with one or more subordinate females. Under normal
circumstances, the alpha female tries to prevent this during mating season by dominating the other
females and keeping them away from the alpha male.

A wolf resting at the entrance to its den; also note how its coloration blends in with the
environment.



The gestation period lasts 60â€“63 days. The pups, at a weight of 0.5 kg (1 lb), are born blind,
deaf, and completely dependent on their mother.[18][4] There are 1 to 14 pups per litter; the
average litter size is about 4 to 6.[22] Pups reside in the den, where they are born deaf with
their eyes closed, and stay there until they reach about three weeks of age.[13] The den is
usually on high ground near an open water source, and has an open "room" at the end of an
underground or hillside tunnel that can be up to a few meters long.[12] During this time, the pups
will become more independent, and will eventually begin to explore the area immediately outside
the den before gradually roaming up to a mile away from it at around 5 weeks of age.[13] They
begin eating regurgitated foods after 2 weeksâ€” by which time their milk teeth have emergedâ€”and
are fully weaned by 8â€“10 weeks.[13] During the first weeks of development, the mother usually
stays with her litter alone, but eventually most members of the pack will contribute to the
rearing of the pups in some way.[18]

After two months, the restless pups will be moved to a rendezvous site, where they can safely stay
while most of the adults go out to hunt.[13] One or two adults stay behind to ensure the safety of
the pups. After a few more weeks, the pups are permitted to join the adults if they are able, and
will receive priority on anything killed, despite their low ranks. The pups tag along as observers
until about 8 months, when they are large enough to actively participate.[13] The fighting over
eating privileges results in a secondary ranking being formed among them, which allows them to
practice the dominance/submission rituals essential to their later survival within packs.[18]

A wolf in captivity at the Beardsley Zoo in Connecticut.



Wolves typically reach sexual maturity after two or three years, when many of them will be
compelled to leave their birth packs and seek out mates and their own territories.[18][23] Wolves
that reach maturity generally live 6 to 8 years in the wild, although in captivity they can live
to twice that age.[22] High mortality rates give them a low overall life expectancy. Pups die when
food is scarce; they can also fall prey to predators such as bears, or, less often, coyotes,
foxes, or other wolves. The most significant causes of mortality for grown wolves are hunting and
poaching, car accidents, and wounds inflicted while hunting prey. Although adult wolves may
occasionally be killed by other predators, rival wolf packs are often their most dangerous
non-human enemy. A study on wolf mortality came up with results indicating that 14% to 65% of wolf
deaths were due to other wolves.[24] Wolves are susceptible to the same infections that affect
domestic dogs, such as mange, heartworm, rabies and canine distemper. Epidemics of these can
drastically reduce the population in an area.


 Behavior
===============

 Body language
====================


        See also: Dog communication

This facial expression is defensive and gives warning to other wolves to be cautious.

This facial expression shows fear.

This wolf's submissive posture, wagging tail and horizontal ears show a friendly greeting.



Wolves can visually communicate with an impressive variety of expressions and moods ranging from
subtle signals, such as a slight shift in weight, to more obvious ones, such as rolling on their
backs to indicate complete submission.[25]

* Dominance â€“ A dominant wolf stands stiff legged and tall. The ears are erect and forward,
  and the hackles bristle slightly. Often the tail is held vertically and curled toward the back.
  This display asserts the wolf's rank to others in the pack. A dominant wolf may stare
  penetratingly at a submissive one, pin it to the ground, "ride up" on its shoulders, or even
  stand on its hind legs.
* Submission (active) â€“ During active submission, the entire body is lowered, and the lips and
  ears are drawn back. Sometimes active submission is accompanied by muzzle licking, or the rapid
  thrusting out of the tongue and lowering of the hindquarters. The tail is placed down, or
  halfway or fully between the legs, and the muzzle often points up to the more dominant animal.
  The back may be partially arched as the submissive wolf humbles itself to its superior; a more
  arched back and more tucked tail indicate a greater level of submission.
* Submission (passive) â€“ Passive submission is more intense than active submission. The wolf
  rolls on its back and exposes its vulnerable throat and underside. The paws are drawn into the
  body. This is often accompanied by whimpering.
* Anger â€“ An angry wolf's ears are erect, and its fur bristles. The lips may curl up or pull
  back, and the incisors are displayed. The wolf may also arch its back, lash out, or snarl.
* Fear â€“ A frightened wolf tries to make its body look small and therefore less conspicuous.
  The ears flatten against the head, and the tail may be tucked between the legs, as with a
  submissive wolf. There may also be whimpering or barks of fear, and the wolf may arch its back.
* Defensive â€“ A defensive wolf flattens its ears against its head.
* Aggression â€“ An aggressive wolf snarls and its fur bristles. The wolf may crouch, ready to
  attack if necessary.
* Suspicion â€“ Pulling back of the ears shows a wolf is suspicious. The wolf also narrows its
  eyes. The tail of a wolf that senses danger points straight out, parallel to the ground.
* Relaxedness â€“ A relaxed wolf's tail points straight down, and the wolf may rest sphinx-like
  or on its side. The wolf may also wag its tail. The further down the tail droops, the more
  relaxed the wolf is.
* Tension â€“ An aroused wolf's tail points straight out, and the wolf may crouch as if ready to
  spring.
* Happiness â€“ As dogs do, a wolf may wag its tail if in a joyful mood. The tongue may loll out
  of the mouth.
* Hunting â€“ A wolf that is hunting is tensed, and therefore the tail is horizontal and
  straight.
* Playfulness â€“ A playful wolf holds its tail high and wags it. The wolf may frolic and dance
  around, or bow by placing the front of its body down to the ground, while holding the rear high,
  sometimes wagged. This resembles the playful behavior of domestic dogs.

 Howling
==============


Howling helps pack members keep in touch, allowing them to communicate effectively in thickly
forested areas or over great distances. Howling also helps to call pack members to a specific
location. Howling can also serve as a declaration of territory, as shown in a dominant wolf's
tendency to respond to a human imitation of a "rival" wolf in an area the wolf considers its own.
This behavior is stimulated when a pack has something to protect, such as a fresh kill. As a rule
of thumb, large packs will more readily draw attention to themselves than will smaller packs.
Adjacent packs may respond to each others' howls, which can mean trouble for the smaller of the
two. Wolves therefore tend to howl with great care.[26]

Howling adult wolf on glacial erratic at Little America Flats.



Wolves will also howl for communal reasons. Some scientists speculate that such group sessions
strengthen the wolves' social bonds and camaraderieâ€” similar to community singing among
humans.[26] During such choral sessions, wolves will howl at different tones and varying pitches,
making it difficult to estimate the number of wolves involved. This confusion of numbers makes a
listening rival pack wary of what action to take. For example, confrontation could be disastrous
if the rival pack gravely underestimates the howling pack's numbers. A wolf's howl may be heard
from up to ten miles away, depending on weather conditions.

Observations of wolf packs suggest that howling occurs most often during the twilight hours,
preceding the adults' departure to the hunt and following their return. Studies also show that
wolves howl more frequently during the breeding season and subsequent rearing process. The pups
themselves begin howling soon after emerging from their dens and can be provoked into howling
sessions easily over the following two months. Such indiscriminate howling usually is intended for
communication, and does not harm the wolf so early in its life.[26] Howling becomes less
indiscriminate as wolves learn to distinguish howling pack members from rival wolves.

 Other vocalizations
==========================


Growling, while teeth are bared, is the most visual and effective warning wolves use. Wolf growls
have a distinct, deep, bass-like quality, and are often used to threaten rivals, though not
necessarily to defend themselves. Wolves also growl at other wolves while being aggressively
dominant.

Wolves bark when nervous or when they want to warn other wolves of danger. Wolves bark very
discreetly, and will not generally bark loudly or repeatedly as dogs do; rather, they use a
low-key, breathy "whuf" sound to immediately get attention of other wolves. Wolves also
"bark-howl" by adding a brief howl to the end of a bark. Wolves bark-howl for the same reasons
they normally bark. Generally, pups bark and bark-howl much more frequently than adults, using
these vocalizations to cry for attention, care, or food.

Wolves can also whimper, usually when submitting to other wolves. Wolf pups whimper when they need
the reassurance of security from their parents or other wolves.

 Scent marking
====================

Wolves scent-roll to bring scents back to the pack.



Wolves, like other canines, use scent marking to lay claim to anything â€” from territory to fresh
kills.[27] Alpha wolves use scent mark the most often; males do so more than females. The most
widely used scent marker is urine. Male and female alpha wolves urine-mark objects with a
raised-leg stance (all other pack members squat) to enforce rank and territory. They also use
marks to identify food caches and to claim kills on behalf of the pack. Defecation markers are
used for the same purposes as urine marks, and serve as a more visual warning, as well.[27]
Defecation markers are particularly useful for navigation, keeping the pack from traversing the
same terrain too often and also allowing each wolf to be aware of the whereabouts of its pack
members. Above all, though, scent marking is used to inform other wolves and packs that a certain
territory is occupied, and that they should therefore tread cautiously.

Wolves have scent glands all over their bodies, including at the base of the tail, between toes,
and in the eyes, genitalia, and skin.[27] Pheromones secreted by these glands identify each
individual wolf. A dominant wolf will "rub" its body against subordinate wolves to mark such
wolves as being members of a particular pack. Wolves may also "paw" dirt to release pheromones
instead of urine marking.[28]

Wolves' heavy reliance on odoriferous signals testifies greatly to their olfactory capabilities.
Wolves can detect virtually any scent, including marks, from great distances, and can distinguish
among them as well or better than humans can distinguish other humans visually.

 Social structure and hunting
===================================

 The pack
===============


Wolves function as social predators and hunt in packs organized according to strict, rank-oriented
social hierarchies.[18] It is thought that this comparatively high level of social organization
had much to do with hunting success. Emerging theories also suggest, however, that the pack has
less to do with hunting and more to do with reproductive success.

The pack is led by the two individuals that sit atop the social hierarchy: the alpha male and the
alpha female. The alpha pair has the greatest amount of social freedom compared to the rest of the
pack. Although they are not "leaders" in the human sense of the term, they help to resolve any
disputes within the pack, have the greatest amount of control over resources, such as food, and
most importantly, hold the pack together. Possessing strong instincts for fellowship, the rest of
the pack usually follows. <source:Julie of the Wolves>

While most alpha pairs are monogamous, there are exceptions.[29] An alpha animal may
preferentially mate with a lower-ranking animal, especially if the other alpha is closely related
(a brother or sister, for example). The death of one alpha does not affect the status of the other
alpha, who will quickly take another mate.[18]

Usually, only the alpha pair is able to successfully rear a litter of pups. Other wolves in a pack
may breed, but will usually lack the resources required to raise the pups to maturity.[specify]
All the wolves in the pack assist in raising wolf pups. Some mature individuals, usually females,
may choose to stay in the original pack so as to reinforce it and help rear more pups. However,
most will disperse.

The size of the pack may change over time and is controlled by several factors, including habitat,
personalities of individual wolves within a pack, and food supply. Packs can contain from 2 to 20
wolves, though an average pack consists of about 8.[30]New packs are formed when a wolf leaves its
birth pack, finds a mate, and claims a territory. Lone wolves searching for other individuals can
travel very long distances seeking out suitable territories. Dispersing individuals must avoid the
territories of other wolves because intruders on occupied territories are chased away or killed.
It is taboo for one wolf to travel into another wolf's territory unless invited. Most dogs, except
perhaps large, specially bred attack dogs, do not stand much of a chance against a pack of wolves
protecting its territory from an intrusion.

 Hierarchy
================

A wolf pack in Yellowstone National Park, with the alphas leading and the omega in the rear.



The hierarchy, led by the alpha male and female, affects all activity in the pack to some extent.
In most larger packs there are two separate hierarchies in addition to an overbearing one: the
first consists of the males, led by the alpha male, and the other consists of the females, led by
the alpha female.[12] In this situation, the alpha male was originally assumed to be the "top"
alpha, but biologists have since concluded that alpha females can and do take control over entire
packs.] The male and female hierarchies are interdependent, and are maintained constantly by
aggressive and elaborate displays of dominance and submission.

After the alpha pair, there may also, especially in larger packs, be a beta wolf or wolves, a
"second-in-command" to the alphas. Betas typically assume a more prominent role in assisting with
the upbringing of the alpha pair's litter, often serving as surrogate mothers or fathers while the
alpha pair is away. Beta wolves are the most likely to challenge their superiors for the role of
the alpha, though some betas seem content with being second, and will sometimes even let lower
ranking wolves leapfrog them for the position of alpha should circumstances necessitate such a
happening, such as the death of the alpha. More ambitious beta wolves, however, will only wait so
long before contending for alpha position unless they choose to disperse and create their own pack
instead

Loss of rank can happen gradually or suddenly. An older wolf may simply choose to give way when a
motivated challenger presents itself, yielding its position without bloodshed. On the other hand,
the challenged individual may choose to fight back, with varying degrees of intensity. While the
majority of wolf aggression is not injurious and is ritualized, a high-stakes fight can easily
result in injury for either or both parties. Deaths do occur, as the average alpha male wolf may
kill two to four wolves in his lifetime.[31] The loser of such a confrontation is frequently
chased away from the pack or, rarely, may be killed as other aggressive wolves contribute to the
insurgency. These confrontations are more common during the mating season.

Rank order within a pack is established and maintained through a series of ritualized fights and
posturing best described as "ritual bluffing". Wolves prefer psychological warfare to physical
confrontations, meaning that high-ranking status is based more on personality or attitude than on
size or physical strength. Rank, who holds it, and how it is enforced varies widely between packs
and between individual animals. In large packs full of easygoing wolves, or in a group of juvenile
wolves, rank order may shift almost constantly, or even be circular (for instance, animal A
dominates animal B, who dominates animal C, who dominates animal A).

In a more typical pack, only one wolf will assume the role of the omega: the lowest-ranking member
of a pack.[27] Omegas receive the most aggression from the rest of the pack, and may be subjected
to truculence at any timeâ€” anything from constant dominance from other pack members to inimical,
physical harassment. Although this arrangement may seem objectionable, the nature of pack dynamics
demands that one wolf be at the bottom of the ranking order, and such individuals are perhaps
better suited for constant displays of active and passive submission than they are for living
alone. For wolves, camaraderieâ€” no matter what the formâ€” is preferable to solitude, and,
indeed, submissive wolves tend to choose low rank over potential starvation. Despite the
aggression they are subject to and being last to eat, omega wolves have also been observed to
often be the most playful wolves in the group, often enticing all of the members of a pack into
engaging in chasing games and other forms of play.

One theory about the domestication of the dog is that it occurred when certain wolves of a
suitable temperament joined bands of human hunter-gatherers due to their organizational
similarities with wolf packs.

 Cooperative hunting and diet
===================================

An American Bison standing its ground, thereby increasing its chance for survival.



Packs of wolves cooperatively hunt any large herbivores in their range. Pack hunting revolves
around the chase, as wolves are able to run for long periods before relenting. It takes careful
cooperation for a pack to take down large prey, and the rate of success for such chases is very
low. Wolves, in the interest of saving energy, will only chase one potential prey for the first
thousand or so meters before giving up and trying at a different time against a different
prey.[32] Therefore, like most other pack species, wolves must hunt continually to sustain
themselves. Solitary wolves depend more on smaller animals, which they capture by pouncing and
pinning them, with their front paws, to the groundâ€” this technique is also common among canids
such as foxes and coyotes.

Wolves' diet includes, but is not limited to, elk, caribou, moose, Sambar Deer, and other large
ungulates. The American Bison is probably the largest animal wolves prey on; bison weighing more
than a ton have been taken down by a pack. They also prey on rodents, small animals, and other
canids like foxes and coyotes in a limited manner,[specify] for a typical adult wolf requires a
minimum of 1.1 kg (2.5 lb) of food each day for sustenance, and approximately 2.2 kg (5 lb) to
reproduce successfully.[22] Wolves do not always have the chance to eat each day; in fact, wolves
rarely eat on a daily basis, but instead compensate by eating up to a maximum of 10 kg (22 lb) at
a time.[22]

When pursuing large prey, wolves generally attack from all angles, targeting the necks and sides
of their prey. Wolf packs test large populations of prey species by initiating a chase, targeting
less-fit prey; such animals typically include the elderly, diseased, and young.[23] Healthy
animals may also succumb through circumstance or by chance. However, most healthy, fit individuals
will stand their ground against wolves, increasing the possibility of injury to the preying
wolves;[specify] thus the weaker members of a species are easier and safer to hunt.

Like many other keystone predators, wolves are sensitive to fluctuations in the abundance of prey;
they are likely to have minor changes in their populations as the abundance of their primary prey
species gradually rises and drops over long periods of time. This balance between wolves and their
prey prevents the mass starvation of both predator and prey.

 Relationships with other predators
=========================================


One of the most well researched wolf/predator interactions is that involving the Coyote. Wolves
are generally intolerant of Coyotes in their territory, seeing them as competitors for food and as
threats to their cubs. In fact, two years after their re-introduction to the Yellowstone National
Park, the wolves were responsible for a near 50% drop in Coyote populations through both
competition and predation. Though smaller in size and not as fast, Coyotes are usually swift
enough to escape the jaws of Wolves and on some occasions, have even been known to gang up on
them.[33] Near identical interactions have been observed in Greece between Wolves and Golden
Jackals.[34]

The Cougar is another predator encountered by the Gray Wolf in North America. As with the Coyote,
the Gray Wolf is usually hostile toward the big cats and will kill kittens, as well as adults when
working in a pack. Douglas Smith, who leads the National Park Service's Yellowstone Wolf Project
has confirmed that a wolf stands little chance against a cougar on a one to one basis.[35]
Yellowstone officials have reported two occasions in which a cougar has ambushed and killed a lone
wolf. One, however, was a cub, and the other showed no signs of canine puncture marks or other
cougar related injury. [36]

Brown bears are among the few competitors wolves encounter in both Eurasia and North America,
while the American Black Bear is encountered solely in America. The majority of interactions
between wolves and bears usually amount to nothing more than mutual avoidance. Serious
confrontations depend on a variety of variables, though the most common factor is defence of food
and young. Bears will use their superior size to intimidate wolves from their kills and when
sufficiently hungry, will raid wolf dens. Wolves in turn have been observed killing bear cubs, to
the extent of even driving off the defending mother bears. Deaths in wolf/bear skirmishes are
however considered very rare occurences, the individual power of the bear and the collective
strength of the wolf pack usually being sufficient deterents to both sides.[37]

In Russia, the Gray Wolf's status as an apex predator is competed by the Siberian Tiger. Siberian
Tigers have been known to prey on Wolves and will sometimes hunt them to remove competition for
the limited prey base.[38] Studies have shown that Gray Wolf populations generally decrease in
areas inhabited by the Siberian Tiger.[39]

In some Middle Eastern countries, the Gray Wolf will sometimes encounter the Striped Hyena, mostly
in disputes over carcasses. Though not as powerful individually, the Gray Wolf's social nature
usually puts the more solitary hyena at a disadvantage in confrontations.[40]

Though the Indian Wolf and the Indian Wild Dog have been portrayed as mortal enemies by author
Rudyard Kipling in Red Dog, studies have shown that there is very little competition between the
two species where they share common ground. The fact that the wolf inhabits open spaces and feeds
primarily on rodents as a contrast to the dog's habit of living in dense forests and hunting
medium sized ungulates is enough to ensure peaceful coexistance.[41]

Of all the wolf's interspecific conflicts, none has contributed more to the species negative
imagery than that against the domestic dog. It has been theorized that wolves treat dogs as they
would any other competitor, which explains why the majority of attacked pets are usually hunting
dogs unwittingly entering the wolf's turf.[42] In some instances, Wolves have displayed an
uncharacteristic fearlessness of humans and buildings when attacking dogs, to an extent where they
have to be beaten off or killed. [43] Few dogs can hold their own against lone wolves, let alone
wolf packs. Notable exceptions include specially bred Livestock guardian dogs, though their
primary function has more to do with intimidating the wolves rather than fighting them.[44]

 Historical perceptions
=============================



        Main article: Attitudes toward wolves

Information in this article or section has not been verified against sources and may not be
reliable.
Please check for inaccuracies and modify as needed, citing the sources against which it was
checked.

The relationship between humans and wolves has had a long and turbulent history. Traditionally
humans held a distasteful view of wolves, a creature they feared. It was also often accentuated in
European folklore. Settlers brought this view with them as they settled North America. The gray
wolf, once found in every ecosystem across the Northern Hemisphere, was one of the first species
to be culled by settlers. As technology made the killing of wolves and predators easier, humans
began to overhunt wolves and cause their numbers to dwindle significantly.

Wolves are nevertheless portrayed positively in some myths and legends, and many languages have
names meaning "wolf". Some examples include, for instance: Scandinavian Ulf, Albanian "Ujk",
Hebrew Ze'ev, Serbian Vuk, Bulgarian VÇŽlko,

Historically, the fear of wolves has been responsible for most of the species' trouble, including
its near extinction in Europe and the United States during the 20th century. Ecological research
in the 20th century has shed new light on wolves and other predators, specifically with regard to
their critical role in maintaining ecosystems to which they belong. This information has led to a
more positive portrayal.

A general increase in environmental awareness began to take root sometime in the middle of the
20th century and forced people to rethink former notions, including those regarding predators. In
North America people realized that in over one hundred years of documentation, there had been no
verified human fatalities caused by an attack from a healthy wolf.[45][46] Wolves are actually
naturally cautious and will almost always flee from humans, perhaps only carefully approaching a
person out of curiosity. There are, however, some reports of possible wolf attacks in North
America that people assumed happen on a regular basis.[47] Although attitudes have significantly
changed, there are still many who hold more cautious views of the wolf. In fact, there are many
Americans who believe that the criteria a wolf attack has to fill (in order to be labelled as an
actual attack) are unreasonable and that they ignore Indian and Eskimo oral history which confirms
that Native Americans were in fact on occasion attacked by wolves long before the arrival of
European settlers. [48]

In Central Asian nations such as that of Turkic peoples and Mongols, the wolf is a revered animal.
The shamanic Turkic peoples even believed they were descendants of wolves in Turkic legends. The
legend of Asena is an old Turkic myth that tells of how the Turkic people were created. In
Northern China a small Turkic village was raided by Chinese soldiers, but one small baby was left
behind. An old she-wolf with a sky-blue mane named Asena found the baby and nursed him, then the
she-wolf gave birth to half wolf, half human cubs therefore the Turkic people were born. Also in
Turkic mythology it is believed that a gray wolf showed the Turks the way out of their legendary
homeland Ergenekon, which allowed them to spread and conquer their neighbours.[1][2][3]

 Reintroduction
=====================



        Main article: Wolf reintroduction

In certain parts of the world, debate about wolf reintroduction is ongoing and often heated, both
where reintroduction is being considered and where it has already occurred. Where wolves have been
successfully reintroduced, as in the greater Yellowstone area and Idaho, reintroduction opponents
continue to cite livestock predation, surplus killing, and economic hardships caused by wolves as
reason why they should never have been reintroduced to begin with, as well as why they should be
removed or severely reduced.[49][50] Opponents in prospective areas echo these same concerns.

However, what the Yellowstone and Idaho reintroductions demonstrate is how compromise can be used
to satisfy relevant interests. These reintroductions were the culmination of over two decades of
research and debate. Ultimately, the economic concerns of the local ranching industry, arguably
the single best reason used against reintroduction, was dealt with when Defenders of Wildlife
decided to establish a fund that would compensate ranchers for livestock lost to wolves, shifting
the economic burden from industry to the wolf proponents themselves.[51] The majority of the
organizations opposing reintroduction relented their "no wolf, no way" stance when this crucial
deal breaker was resolved.

As of 2005, there are over 450 wolves in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem and over 1,000 in
Idaho. Both populations have long since met their recovery goals and the reintroduction experiment
has been a resounding success. Still, lessons learned from this ordeal may yet prove useful where
wolf reintroduction continues to create a sharp divide between industry and environmental
interests, as it has in Arizona (where the Mexican Wolf was released beginning in 1998). In some
other Western and Central European countries, the debate will likely impair wolf reintroduction
efforts where they are being considered, but, as history has validated, industry need not be
ignored for a reintroduction effort to be successful.

Though many hunters, prior to and even after reintroduction, claimed that wolves would wipe out
entire populations of elk, deer and other ungulates, most ecosystems where wolves have been
reintroduced have actually become much healthier than they were before. Since Wolves have arrived,
the food chain within the Yellowstone ecosystem has been re-ordered to deliver a banquet that
favors a more varied array of species. Prior to wolves, high numbers of elk were linked to
declines in aspen and willow communities, which negatively affected beaver and moose. Pre-wolf,
coyote numbers swelled, affecting small rodent populations, foxes, and the production of pronghorn
antelope. Pre-wolf scavengers had slimmer pickings. Today with wolves taking elk, reducing their
numbers, and leaving more carcasses on the landscape, grizzlies and wolverines have easier access
to more meat, meaning a better chance for larger litters of cubs and pups. Coyote numbers have
been significantly reduced, meaning more mice and pocket gophers for foxes and avian predators
like hawks and eagles.[52] Wolves play an undeniably important role in the environment and through
education organizations some people may be slowly getting the message that they are vital. In
addition, reports have been published placing the value of revenue from wolf-watching as upward of
$25 million.

 Wolf hunting
===================



        Main article: Wolf hunting

 Livestock predation
==========================


As long as there is enough prey, wolves seem to avoid taking livestock, often ignoring them
entirely.[53] However, some wolves or packs can specialize in hunting livestock once the behavior
is learned despite natural prey abundance. In such situations, sheep are usually the most
vulnerable, but horses and cattle are also at risk. Wolf-secure fences, relocation where
applicable and sometimes hunting wolves are the only known methods to effectively stop livestock
predation.

Over several centuries, shepherds and dog breeders have used selective breeding to "create" large
livestock-guarding dogs that can stand up to wolves preying on flocks.[54] In the U.S., in light
of the gray wolf and other large predators having recently been reintroduced to certain areas, the
United States Department of Agriculture has been looking into the use of breeds such as the Akbash
from Turkey, the Maremma from Italy, the Great Pyrenees from France, and the Kuvasz from Hungary,
among others, to help limit wolf-livestock interactions.

While wolf predation on livestock does happen, loss of livestock by wolves makes up only a small
percentage of total losses. Since the state of Montana began recording livestock losses due to
wolves back in 1987, only 1,200 sheep and cattle have been killed. 1,200 killings in twenty years
is not very significant when in the greater Yellowstone region 8,300 cattle and 13,000 sheep die
from natural causes. To put depredation in perspective, in 1986 the wolf population was at about
1,300-1,400, there were an estimated 232,000 cattle and 16,000 sheep in Minnesota's wolf range.
During that year 26 cattle, about 0.01% of the cattle available, and 13 sheep, around 0.08% of the
sheep available, were verified as being killed by wolves. Similarly, in 1996 an estimated 68,000
households owned dogs in wolf range and only 10, approximately 0.00015% of the households,
experienced wolf depredation.[55] Furthermore, Jim Dutcher, a film maker who raised a captive wolf
pack observed that wolves are very reluctant to try meat that they have not eaten or seen another
wolf eat before possibly explaining why livestock depredation is unlikely except for in cases of
desperation.[56]

In some areas across the world, hunters or state officials will hunt wolves from helicopters or
light planes to control populations (or for sport in some instances), citing it as the most
effective way to control wolf numbers, given that traditional poisons are largely banned. The
method is used where interactions between livestock and wolves are common, or where sport or
subsistence hunters desire more game animals with less competition. Aerial hunting is seen as
highly controversial. In areas where aerial hunting is used to limit livestock-wolf interactions
or to boost populations of game animals, arguments against it are usually centered around whether
or not the reasons behind such predator elimination are scientifically valid.

In Alaska, for example, wolves are sometimes hunted from aircraft.

Other, non- or less-lethal methods of protecting livestock from wolves have been under development
for the past decade. Such methods include rubber ammunition and use of guard animals.[57]

 Trapping and breeding for fur
====================================

"How Wolves may be caught with a Snare," 15th century.



Wolves are frequently trapped, in the areas where it is legal, using snares or leg hold traps.
Wolf trapping has come under heavy fire from animal rights groups, who allege that unskilled
trappers can create unnecessary suffering for the animal involved.[58] Proponents counter that
trapping, using the right tools and equipment, can be considered as humane as traditional
hunting.[59]

A radio-collared wolf.



Wolves are also bred for their fur in a very few locations, but they are considered as a rather
problematic animal to breed, and, combined with the low value of the pelt, most fur farms utilize
other animals. Wolves' varied coats make it difficult to create fur coats.

Biologists may also trap wolves for research purposes. Darting and foot hold traps are the tools
of choice for such professionals, who often use these and similar techniques to fit wolves and
other animals with collars holding radio transmitters and to check their health before releasing
them. Use of such technology also allows them to keep track of population numbers and dispersal
trends, among other things. Radio collars can also be used to monitor wolves when they come near
livestock, and to identify a wolf or a pack that preys on livestock, allowing proper action to be
prompter and more accurate.

 Taxonomy
===============

 Classification and relation to the dog
=============================================


Much debate has occurred over the relationship between the wolf and the domestic dog. Most
authorities see the wolf as the dog's direct ancestor, but others have postulated descent from the
Golden Jackal. Because the canids have evolved recently and different canids interbreed readily,
untangling the true relationships has presented difficulties. However, molecular systematics now
indicate very strongly that domestic dogs and wolves are more closely related than either is to
any other canid, and the domestic dog is now normally classified as a subspecies of the wolf:
Canis lupus familiaris. The main differences between wolves and domestic dogs are that wolves
have, on average, 30% larger brains, a better immune system, better sense of smell, and are
generally much larger than domestic dogs.[60]

The classification of wolves and closely related creatures offers many challenges. Although
taxonomists have proposed many species over the years, most types clearly do not comprise true
species. Indeed, only a single wolf species may exist. While scientists have proposed a host of
subspecies, wolf taxonomy at this level remains controversial.[61] Further taxonomic modification
will continue for years to come.

 Subspecies of the wolf
=============================


It was once believed there were up to 50 subspecies. However, the last decade has seen a new and
widely accepted list that has been condensed to 13 living subspecies, 15 including the common dog
and dingo, and 2 recently extinct subspecies. This takes into account the anatomy, distribution,
and migration of various wolf colonies.

map
Arabian Wolf Canis lupus arabs Critically endangered, declining Israel, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Oman
A very small subspecies. Typically blended brown or completely brown with a thin coat. Hunted
regularly as a nuisance animal, though rarely encountered.
Arctic Wolf Canis lupus arctos Stable Canadian Arctic, Greenland
An average-sized subspecies. Almost exclusively white or creamy white with a thick coat. Hunted
legally, though rarely encountered.
Caspian Sea Wolf Canis lupus cubanensis Endangered, declining Between the Caspian and Black seas
A smaller subspecies. Hunted as a nuisance animal.
Dingo Canis lupus dingo Vulnerable
(pure breed) Australia & southeast Asia
Hunted as a nuisance animal. Pure breed declining from interbreeding with the Domestic Dog.
Domestic Dog Canis lupus familiaris Stable Worldwide
Typically, a smaller subspecies, with 20% smaller brains, more feeble immune system, and poorer
sense of smell. Maintained as pets, although some small feral populations do exist. Raised for
their meat in some parts of the world.
Eastern Timber Wolf Canis lupus lycaon At risk Southeastern Canada, Eastern United States
A larger subspecies. Full canine color spectrum represented, though blended pelages predominate.
First subspecies to be recognized in North America. Hunted legally in parts of Canada.
Egyptian Wolf Canis lupus lupaster Critically endangered, probably extinct Far Northern Africa
A smaller subspecies. Usually a grizzled or tinged gray or brown. Lanky. Very rarely encountered.
Eurasian Wolf Canis lupus lupus Stable Western Europe, Scandinavia, Russia, China, Mongolia,
Himalaya Mountains
An average-sized subspecies. Generally short, blended gray fur. Largest range among wolf
subspecies. Most common wolf subspecies in Europe and Asia. Population roughly 100,000. Hunted
legally in some places, protected in others.
Great Plains Wolf Canis lupus nubilus Stable Southern Rocky Mountains, Midwestern United States,
Eastern and Northeastern Canada, far Southwestern Canada, and Southeastern Alaska
An average-sized subspecies. Usually gray, black, buff, or reddish. The most common subspecies in
the contiguous U.S. Hunted legally in parts of Canada.
Hokkaido Wolf Canis lupus hattai Extinct Japanese island of Hokkaido
A smaller subspecies. Became extinct in 1889 as a result of poisoning campaigns.
Honshu Wolf Canis lupus hodophilax Extinct Japanese islands of Honshu, Shikoku, and Kyushu
A very small subspecies. Became extinct in 1905 from a combination of rabies and human eradication
efforts.
Indian Wolf Canis lupus pallipes Endangered, declining Israel, Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India
A very small subspecies. Typically tawny, buff, or reddish with a short, dense coat. Hunted as a
nuisance animal.
Italian Wolf Canis lupus italicus Endangered Italian peninsula
An average-sized subspecies. Full canine color spectrum represented. Occupy comparatively smaller
territories. Protected.
Mackenzie Valley Wolf Canis lupus occidentalis Stable Alaska, Northern Rockies, Western and
Central Canada
A very large subspecies. Usually black or a blended gray or brown, but full color spectrum
represented. This subspecies was reintroduced to Yellowstone National Park and Idaho starting in
1995. Hunted legally in Alaska and parts of Canada. Protected in the contiguous states.
Mexican Wolf Canis lupus baileyi Critically endangered Central Mexico, Western Texas, Southern New
Mexico and Arizona
A smaller subspecies. Usually tawny brown or rusty in color. Reintroduced to Arizona starting in
1998. Current wild population 35-50. Current captive population 300. Protected.
Russian Wolf Canis lupus communis Stable, declining Central Russia
A very large subspecies. Hunted legally.
Tundra Wolf Canis lupus albus Stable Northern Russia, Siberia
A larger subspecies. Typically creamy white or gray, though full spectrum is represented. Hunted
legally.

 Media
============



* Wolf howl recording (file info) â€” play in browser (beta)
* Problems playing the files? See media help.

 See also
===============


* Werewolf
* Wolves in fiction
* Wolfdog
* Dog communication
* Attitudes toward wolves
* Wolf reintroduction
* Wolf hunting
* International Wolf Center
* Wild Canid Survival and Research Center
* L. David Mech
* Wiktionary:Wolf
* Wikiquote:Wolf

Three other extant canid species also known as wolves:

* Red Wolf
* Eastern Canadian Wolf
* Ethiopian Wolf

Extinct wolves:

* Dire Wolf
* Japanese Wolf

Pseudo wolves:

* Tasmanian wolf
* Maned wolf
* Falklands wolf

